@c -*- texinfo -*-

@c To compile: makeinfo --no-validate  --no-headers faq.texi > FAQ

@chapter Frequently Asked Questions

@enumerate

@item How can I get informations on Sawfish?

@itemize
@item Homepage: @url{http://sawfish.wikia.com/}.
@item Mailing list: Please subscribe at @url{http://mail.gnome.org/mailman/listinfo/sawfish-list}. You can browse the archives at @url{http://mail.gnome.org/archives/sawfish-list/}.
@item IRC: Join @code{#sawfish} on @code{irc.freenode.net}.
@end itemize

@item How do I read the Info manual?

@itemize
@item From root menu (middle click the background), choose @code{Help} section.
@item Execute the command @samp{info sawfish}
@item In emacs, enter the Info mode (@kbd{C-h i}) and type @kbd{g (sawfish) RET}.
@item If you're using GNOME, then try executing @samp{gnome-help-browser
info:sawfish}.
@end itemize

@item I installed Sawfish but it's not working!  All I see when I
start X is the default stipple background: no programs, no menus, no
pager.

This is exactly what it's supposed to do, but first try middle-click
(by default) on the background. This invokes the menu. (If you have a
two-button mouse, try clicking both buttons simultaneously).

Why this is so? Because Sawfish is minimal - Sawfish is a @emph{window
manager} and as such is not responsible for setting the background,
starting programs or displaying a pager --- these can all be done
using separate applications (e.g. by using a desktop environment such
as GNOME).

@item How do I customize Sawfish?

There're two ways, by the configurator GUI and by preparing lisp
code. The GUI can be run by middle-clicking background ->
``Customize''. Most customizations similar to other window managers
can be done through GUI.

For customizations by lisp, first understand that in the startup, files
@file{~/.sawfish/custom}, @file{.sawfishrc} are read in this order.

@table @asis
@item @file{~/.sawfish/custom}
This file is created and edited by the configurator GUI, and stores
customizations. It shouldn't really be edited manually.

@item @file{~/.sawfish/rc}  or @file{~/.sawfishrc}
This is the file you edit. It is a hand written lisp code, and almost
all explicit customizations should be done here.

Choose the filename either @file{~/.sawfish/rc} or
@file{~/.sawfishrc}. The former is recommended, because the directory
@file{~/.sawfish} is anyway created to store @file{custom}, and you
can also put other lisp scripts, like user-contributed codes there.

Sawfish < 1.6 reads @file{sawfish-defaults} by default only if
@file{~/.sawfishrc} lacks, but now it is always read.
@end table

@item How do I bind a key to execute a shell command?

Bind a key to the @samp{run-shell-command} command; remember to enter
the shell command you want to execute in the string entry in the
@samp{Edit binding} dialog window.


@item How do I make clicking on a window raise the window?

Bind the event @kbd{Button1-Click1} in the @code{window-keymap} to the
@code{raise-window-and-pass-through-click} command


@item How do I redefine the @samp{Applications} menu?

See the @samp{Popup Menus} node in the Info manual (@pxref{Popup
Menus})

@item How do I compile Lisp files?

Use the shell command:

@example
sawfish --batch -l compiler -f compile-batch @var{files@dots{}}
@end example

@noindent where @var{files@dots{}} are the names of the files you want
to compile. They will normally have @file{.jl} suffixes, the compiler
will create associated files with @file{.jlc} suffixes containing the
compiled Lisp code.

Remember that always the latest code is read, i.e., if the source is
newer than the byte compiled file, the source is used, unlike emacs.

@item How do I create a new theme?

See the @samp{Window Frames} node of the Info manual (@pxref{Window
Frames})

Basically though, create a directory @file{~/.sawfish/themes/@var{foo}}
where @var{foo} is the name of your theme. Then copy any images into
this directory and create a file @file{theme.jl} that will be loaded to
initialize the theme


@item How do I port an Enlightenment theme to Sawfish?

There's no automatic translation available. Get the images used in the
window border, then write a @file{theme.jl} file telling the window
manager how they are used to form a window frame

See the @file{themes/brushed-metal} directory for an example, and the
Info manual for the documentation


@item Are there any other themes available?

Yes, there are plenty actually. Most of them reside over at freshmeat: @url{http://themes.freshmeat.net/browse/926/}.
You can also take a look at the Themes section on the Sawfish website: @url{http://sawfish.wikia.com/wiki/Themes}.


@item Why don't GTK themes work with Sawfish?

There was a problem with older versions of the @code{gtk-engines}
package preventing engine based themes working with several interpreted
languages. Get the latest @code{gtk-engines} from
@url{ftp://ftp.gnome.org/}

@item Sound support.

Here we explain sound support which can't be set via Configurator.

You can add sound files under @file{~/.sawfish/sounds/}. This path can
be changed with @code{audio-load-path} variable. See the file
@file{OPTIONS} for the format.

The program to play sounds is set by @code{play-sample-program}. If
you want to pass arguments or redirect the output, prepare a wrapper script,
for example something like following:

@example
#!/bin/sh

# No need of backgrounding.
mplayer -volume 30 "$1" &>/dev/null
@end example

@item What's this @code{sawfish-client} program?

This allows you to connect to a window manager process and evaluate
arbitrary Lisp forms. Do @samp{sawfish-client -?} for more details
(@samp{sawfish-client -} for a read-eval-print loop)

By default you can only connect from the host running the wm (through a
unix-domain socket). To enable the network based server, evaluate the
lisp form @code{(server-net-init)}.

Note however that this connects through the X server, meaning that
anyone who can open windows on your display can also execute any Lisp
code on the host running the window manager (and by extension,
@emph{execute any program}).

So @emph{don't} run the net server with X access control disabled
(unless you're not connected to a network).

@item How do I restart Sawfish?

From a shell lauch the following command: @code{sawfish-client -q -f restart}

@item Shutdown privilege.

The Sawfish root-menu has a ``session'' sub-menu which allows you to
shutdown your machine. If you use GNOME or KDE, no additional work is
required. But if you use Sawfish standalone, the user needs the
privilege to execute @code{shutdown} command.

You can do it, for example, with @code{sudo} combined with user group
@code{shutdown}:

@example
$ groupadd shutdown      # add a new group called "shutdown"
$ adduser john shutdown  # add user "john" to the "shutdown" group
$ visudo                 # add the group "shutdown" to sudoers
  
# add the following:
%shutdown ALL=(root) NOPASSWD: /sbin/shutdown
@end example

That's it, now everyone in the @code{shutdown} group can do it!

@item I have multiple heads. Is it possible to switch workspace per head?

You have to devise a trick, because the strict answer is no.  There's
``sticky-head'' script which partly achives it on the wiki, but it's
still incomplete: @url{http://sawfish.wikia.com/wiki/Sticky-head}

Technically, Sawfish's workspace implements ``virtual desktop''
specified in the window manager standard (ewmh), which has to be
at least the size of the X screen, so the workspace has to containt
all heads. ``Per head workspace'' has to be implemented as a new
mechanism on top of workspace.

@item Why don't you use GUILE?

Mainly because I'm lazy; I had already written rep, and therefore
understood it completely, whereas I have never used GUILE. Also, rep
has some features not available in GUILE (byte-code compilation,
autoloading, built-in event-loop, @dots{})

But before you flame me: yes I do think scheme is a more elegant
language.


@item Will you add feature @var{x}?

Possibly. But only if it can be written in Lisp, or doesn't conflict
with the overall design aims.

These aims are to build a lightweight, generally applicable, set of
core window management functions, then write @emph{all} high-level
functionality as Lisp extensions


@item Will you add background setting?

No. This can easily be done by a separate application (e.g. with the
GNOME hints, simply monitor property @code{_WIN_WORKSPACE} on the root
window).

@item Why does Sawfish look weird/crash on Solaris?

Sawfish works stably on Solaris, but you may need to do two things:

@enumerate
@item
Disable use of MIT-SHM by Imlib (run the program @code{imlib_config},
the MIT-SHM option is on the @samp{Rendering} page)

@item
Recompile GTK+ using the @samp{--disable-xim} option to configure
@end enumerate

@item Why don't some windows ever get focused?

Because that window doesn't accept it. Technically, windows ask to
receive focus by setting their WM_HINTS property appropriately; for
example if I xprop a gnome-terminal:

@example
WM_HINTS(WM_HINTS):
                Client accepts input or input focus: True
                Initial state is Normal State.
                window id # of group leader: 0x5c00001
@end example


@item Why doesn't the GNOME desk-guide / tasklist show the true state
of my desktop?

It seems that there is a problem with these applets that only occurs
after restarting Sawfish - they seem to lose track of the current window
states.

The simplest way to correct this is to execute the following shell
commands:

@example
$ save-session
$ killall panel
@end example

@noindent
(assuming you have a session manager to restart the panel afterwards!)


@item What do these @samp{bytecode-error} messages mean?

It means that you're trying to execute Lisp code that was compiled for
an outdated version of the Lisp virtual machine. Recompile any Lisp
files that you have installed locally.

@item Historical question: Why is it now called @emph{Sawfish}?

Because the old name (@samp{Sawmill}) was already being used by another
company, who were in the process of registering it as a trademark.

The rename should be mostly painless, all old binaries still work for
the time being, but will be phased out over time (final phasing out
started around 1.5.0). Where before you would execute a program called
@file{sawmill*}, replace it by @file{sawfish*}. E.g. @file{sawmill}
becomes @file{sawfish}, and @file{sawmill-client} becomes
@file{sawfish-client}.

Your @file{~/.sawmill} directory will automatically be renamed
@file{~/.sawfish} unless it would overwrite an existing file. Only
user configuration @file{~/.sawfish[/]rc} will be checked currently,
@file{~/.sawmillrc} is not used anymore (it was also read up to
version 1.3.5).

My apologies for any inconvenience caused.

@item Historical question: But why @emph{Sawfish}, and not <insert your favourite
alternative>?

Well I had to choose something! And hopefully it satisfies the main
requirements:

@itemize @bullet
@item There are no other computer-related users of the name (as checked
in April 2000,)

@item It's similar enough to the old name to hopefully carry some
recognition across,

@item It has no tenuous relationship to window-managing.
@end itemize

Incidentally, there was no meaning to the name ``Sawmill'', the author
grepped @file{/usr/dict/words} for something containing ``wm''.

@end enumerate
