@c -*- texinfo -*-

@chapter News

This lists the user-visible changes made to Sawfish, and which releases
they occurred between. For more detailed information see the
@file{ChangeLog} file in the Sawfish source tree, or git log.
(See Wiki page for how to access git repository.)

@heading 1.6.1 "Astral"

@itemize @bullet

@item The 1.6.1 release brings several bugfixes and improvements

@item Build and Installation
@itemize @minus

@item The configure option @code{--without-nine-mouse-buttons} is not allowed
to have 4 hyphens, therefore it's renamed to @code{--without-nine-mousebuttons},
to make it work. [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Reworked configures help-message for better readability [Kim B. Heino]

@item Configure now uses @code{kde4-config --install data} rather than
@code{kde4-config --path data}, so no sed-kludge is needed anymore.

Make $datadir/kde4/apps/ the fallback path, if KDE4 is not installed
[Kim B. Heino]

@item Generate debian/changelog from debian/changelog.in [Christopher Bratusek]

@item The spec has been reworked to detect kde4/librep directories while runtime,
instead of hardcoding those paths from configure, which makes it more portable.
[Kim B. Heino]

@end itemize
@item Doc
@itemize @minus

@item Fixed a small doc misstake (refered to window-set instead of window-put)
[Christopher Bratusek]

@item Last 3 ``sawmill'' replaced by ``sawfish'' [Kim B. Heino]
@end itemize
@end itemize

@heading 1.6.0 "Sound Of Thunder"

@itemize @bullet

@item The 1.6.0 release has new features and bugfixes

@item Build and installation changes
@itemize @minus

@item New/Updated requirements:
@itemize +
@item librep 0.90.0 -> 0.90.4
@item rep-gtk 0.18.4 -> 0.90.0
@end itemize

@item Removed requirements: LibAudioFile and ESounD
@item Mouse buttons 6 - 9 support is now optional

Support for 6 - 9 mouse buttons is now optional. X.Org/XFree86 headers
only define up to 5 buttons, and we use a working but somewhat hackish
workaround for getting buttons 6 - 9 which is suspected to cause some
problems with modifiers. Support for them is enabled by default. If
you want to disable it, add the following flag to configure:

@code{--without-nine-mousebuttons}
@c Well, ``code'' gives ugly (back)quote, but otherwise the first hyphen is dropped.

If you drop it, then you can't use mouse button 8 to, for example,
drag windows.

@item Installation directory change

Directory @file{libexec} is not used anymore for library files
installation. Instead, they go into @file{lib} by default.
@end itemize

@item Incompatible user visible changes:
@itemize @minus

@item Configurator's binary, @code{sawfish-ui}, is renamed to @code{sawfish-config} [Christopher Bratusek]

Its window class is changed to @code{sawfish-configurator} /
@code{Sawfish-Configurator}, too. The lisp module is renamed from
@code{sawfish.ui} to @code{sawfish.cfg}.

@item Infinite Desktop boundary behavior and option

In @code{infinite-desktop}, the option to specify the boundary
behavior has changed. If @code{viewport-boundary-mode} is
@code{dynamic}, then you can go as far as you like. Otherwise, it
stops at the workspace boundary of which size is specified by
@code{viewport-dimensions}. Now the latter is the default. See also
``dynamic viewport'' described below.

The previous variable, @code{infinite-desktop.stop-at-workspace-borders},
which is used for this purpose, no longer exists.

@item User config file changes

In Sawfish < 1.6, @code{sawfish.wm.defaults} is loaded by default,
only if the @file{~/.sawfishrc} lacks. Now, it is always read, so you
don't have to @code{require} it. It sets up GNOME or KDE support if
found running, and does load the error-handling module.

Since Sawfish 1.5 @code{~/.sawmillrc} is no longer a valid configuration-
file. From this version on, Sawfish will rename @code{~/.sawmillrc} to
@code{~/.sawfishrc}, if the former does exist on your system, but the
latter doesn't.

@item In configurator, the "Matched Windows" group has been renamed to "Window Rules"

@item Sound support has changed. [Christopher Bratusek]

Sawfish used to rely on ESounD and LibAudioFile to play sound, but we
dropped that. If you want sound, set the variable @code{play-sample-program}
to the path of the program capable of playing *.wav file. You can set the
variable from the Configurator, too. By default `paplay' is beeing used.

You can't set any arguments to pass from this variable. If you want to
give arguments or redirect output, write a wrapper
program. (@pxref{FAQ}, ``Sound support'' section.)

@item GNOME integration updates [Christopher Bratusek]

GNOME support is trimmed down. All we offer now is as follows:

If GNOME runs, in @code{session} submenu under Sawfish root menu,
logout and shutdown from GNOME are added. Don't remove @code{quit} and
@code{restart} from menu now. GNOME help is available in menu.

Unless set by user, gnome-terminal.wrapper and gnome-www-browser are used for
user options @code{xterm-program} and @code{browser-program}.

Most of dropped GNOME integrationcode is ancient, mainly for 1.x and
early 2.x. Files @file{lisp/sawfish/wm/commands/gnome.jl} and
@file{lisp/sawfish/wm/state/gnome.jl} are deleted.

GNOME-Detection has been updated for recent versions. [Alexey I. Froloff]

@item xterm and browser changes

Module @code{sawfish.wm.commands.xterm} is renamed to
@code{sawfish.wm.commands.launcher}. Option @code{xterm-args} is
dropped. If you use it, simply append its value to @code{xterm-program}.

Customization-group is changed from @code{misc} to @code{External
Applications}.

The functinon @code{display-url} is renamed to @code{browser}, now
defined in the module cited above. Variable @code{display-url-command} is
renamed to @code{browser-program}.

@item Sawfish pager

If you've been using Sawfish-pager, then you have to recompile it,
due to library files location change.

@item Deletion of @code{user-level} property

(This affects almost none.) There has been a defcustom property
@code{user-level}. It has been deprecated for years, and it's
now deleted.
@end itemize

@item Bugs fixed:
@itemize @minus

@item Prevents crashes for quick window destructions, especially under high load

There have been crashes if a window is destroyed soon after its creation.
It happens in @code{add_window} function, and the cause is guessed to be
garbage collection following window destruction before the object access.

Now most parts of @code{add_window} are protected from garbage
collection with @code{rep_PUSHGC} / @code{rep_POPGC}. It also prevents
@code{add_window_hook} from being called with uninitialised argument.
[Timo Korvola, Janek Kozicki]

@item Random window disapperance prevention

There're reports of sudden, random window disapperance, under Xinerama
and some other drivers. It is partly prevented, but not completely, as
this may also be caused by other libraries or buggy video drivers.

Now in error_handler() in src/display.c, when a window sends request_code
12 (X_ConfigureWindow), don't auto-assume it to be unmapped. [Janek
Kozicki]

@item Build and Installation:
@itemize +
@item Library check: Fix in @code{SMlib} and @code{libICE} check on x11r7 [Christopher Bratusek]

@item @file{.desktop} files fixes: typos fixed and unneeded entries removal [Christopher Bratusek]

@item In spec file, repexecdir definition is fixed [Christopher Bratusek]

@item In @file{po/Makefile.in}, a wrong call of make-pot is fixed [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Always build the FAQ upon make [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Expand REP_ENVIRON in scripts/Makefile.in [Luis Rodrigo Gallardo Cruz]

@item Add @code{--tag=CC} to libtool where necessary. It unbrakes compilation on some arches [Gentoo Linux]

@item Use $prefix/lib instead of $prefix/libexecdir, to satisfy the FHS [Christopher Bratusek]
@end itemize
@item In configurator,

Strings are now fully translatable [Alexey I. Froloff]

SpinButton listens to manual value change. (It's now connected to the correct signal.)  [Christoper Bratusek]

Position parameters can be negative [Christopher Bratusek, Teika Kazura]

@item Fixed Focus issues with KDE4 Menu/Run-Dialog [Timo Korvola]

@item Fix cursor-warping in conjuction with Infinite-Desktop [Jeremy Hankins]

@item Fixed group of the stagger options [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Fixed a call of @code{select-workspace-from-first} [Michal Maruška]

@item In @code{Simple} theme, windows are now resizable from the right border [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Missing exports are now supplied, for shrink-yank functions and @code{send-to-workspace}. [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Commands @code{maximize-window-fullscreen} and @code{maximize-window-fullxinerame} work. [Teika kazura]

@item Variable @code{this-command} is @code{nil} outside of command call.

@item Customization option @code{uniconify-to-current-viewport} has been undeprecated. [Teika kazura]
@end itemize
@item New features:
@itemize @minus

@item New application menu [Matthew Love, Timo Korvola]

Sawfish now generates application menu automatically, by reading
@file{/usr/share/applications/*.desktop} files. If you manually set
@code{apps-menu}, then it won't be. If you like to have both your
own applications menu and auto the generated one, then refer back to
@code{user-apps-menu} rather than @code{apps-menu}. In addition you can
use the variable @code{desktop-directory} to specify a different directory
to look for *.desktop files, or a set of directories, if desired.

Root, and Window-Operations menus are revamped, too. [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Added options to change the font color of window title, independent of the theme in use [Matthew Love, Christopher Bratusek, Timo Korvola]

Internally, a new function @code{remove-frame-part-value} which allows to change/remove values from frame-parts is used. [Timo Korvola]

@item Sawfish does now support theme-tarballs compressed with XZ (aka LZMA2) and LZMA [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Xinerama support for Grow/Pack [Nolan Leake]

Make grow/pack Xinerama aware. The support still remains basic, as it only
supports up to 3 displays. Shrink-yank hasn't been changed at this point.

@item Window rules can be set by lisp

Window rules (former ``matched windows'') can easily be set from
configurator, but it can now be set by lisp, too, with
@code{add-window-matcher} function. For the details, @xref{Window
Rules by Matching}. An example usage is like this:


@lisp
(add-window-matcher '((WM_NAME . "^root$")
                      (WM_CLASS . "^XTerm/xterm$"))
                    '((ignore-program-position . t)
                      (maximize . vertical)))
@end lisp

In fact, this function has already existed, but now it can now specify
both windowname and -class, also the grammar has changed. The old syntax
is still allowed, but deprecated.

@item Keymap translation [Scott Scriven]

Sawfish can ``translate'' keymaps for each window. Suppose you have
the following lines in your @file{~/.sawfish/rc}:

@lisp
(add-window-matcher
        '((WM_NAME . "^Terminal$"))
        '(keymap-trans . (("C-n" "C-S-t")
                          ("C-w" "C-S-w"))))
@end lisp

Then, when you press @kbd{C-n}, any windows with name ``Terminal''
receive @kbd{C-S-t}, and so on.

This is part of window rules, but it cannot be exposed in the configurator yet.

@item New window rules
@itemize +
@item Maximizations @code{fullscreen} and @code{full-xinerama} are available now (@pxref{Maximizing Without Borders}) [Jeremy Hankins]
@item Window position can also be specified by the direction, like north or east, instead of the coordinates. [Jeremy Hankins]
@item New window rules @code{new-workspace} and @code{new-viewport}, which place a window on the first empty Workspace or Viewport (if there's none, one will be generated), have been introduced [Jeremy Hankins]

If @code{new-workspace} is chosen, then the window is put in an empty
workspace, or a new workspace is created if none. A workspace with
sticky windows only are considered empty. @code{new-viewport} is
the same but an empty viewport is chosen. If none is, the workspace is
enlarged, and the window is put in a new viewport.
@item @code{window-name} can change the window's name. [Christopher Bratusek]
@end itemize

@item New commands [Christopher Bratusek]

5 new move-cursor commands, 4 diagonals and 1 to center. (@pxref{Pointer Functions}

Three window manipulation commands, @code{double-window-size}, @code{halve-window-size}, and @code{move-window-center}.
The former two are based on the @code{resize-by-factor} metafunction.

@code{browser} invokes a browser instance.

@item New functions
@code{rename-window} changes the window name. [from ``mmc'' fork, Christopher Bratusek]

In practice, it works, but technically speaking, the
window name is not supposed to be changed in ICCCM, by the Window-Manager.

@code{viewport-windows} returns windows in a viewport. [Jeremy Hankins]

@code{get-window-by-class} and @code{get-window-by-class-re} [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Dynamic Viewport-Boundary-Mode [Jeremy Hankins]

When you set @code{viewport-boundary-mode} to @code{dynamic},
then the workspace grows and shrinks dynamically so that it contains
all windows and the current viewport. For the details, @xref{Dynamic
Viewport}.

@item KDE4 integration module [Christopher Bratusek]

KDE4 is automatically detected. KDE help, and KDE logout, shutdown, and
reboot are provided in the menu. In KDE4 WM Selector, Sawfish is
added.

Unless set by user, konsole and konqueror are used for user options
@code{xterm-program} and @code{browser-program}.

@item Poweroff from menu

Added poweroff commands in menu for non KDE/GNOME users. There are
reboot, halt, suspend and hibernate. The used shell commands can be
set from configurator, under ``Misc'' -> ``External Applications''. If
you don't want it, set @code{want-poweroff-menu} to nil.

User needs the appropriate privilege. For a way to do so, see
@xref{FAQ}, ``Shutdown privilege'' section.

Reboot and halt call @code{before-exit-hook} and do
@code{delete-window} to each window before actually rebooting or
halting, to ensure everything is fine on the next startup.

@item New Frame Classes [Christopher Bratusek] @*
A ``frame class'' defines frame component and are used by themers to add
buttons or frames to their theme in charge. There are no user visible changes.

@itemize +

@item @code{sticky-button}, a button to toggle window @code{sticky} or @code{viewport-sticky}

@item @code{lock-button}, a button to toggle window position @code{fixed}

@item @code{rename-button}, a button to rename the window-title and window-icon properties (not ICCCM compliant)

@item @code{move-resize-button}, a button to perform various move and resize actions on a window

@item @code{raise-lower-button}, a button to perform various raising and lowering actions on a window
@end itemize
@end itemize
@item Widget Transistion [Christopher Bratusek]
@itemize @minus

@item Custom make-url-widget replaced by GtkLinkButton

@item Custom about-dialog replaced by GtkAboutDialog

@item GtkButton + GtkPreview + GtkColorSelection trio replaced by single GtkColorButton
@end itemize
@item Other Changes:
@itemize @minus

@item Startup window placement improvement [Jeremy Hankins]

At Sawfish startup including restart, maximized windows and
position specified windows used to mess up viewport, appearing
in wrong viewports. It's fixed now.

@item Renamed @code{after-add-window} to @code{maxmize-after-add-window} @*
This function is only used in a hook [Teika Kazura]

@item Don't let @code{cycle-class} and @code{cycle-class-backwards} ignore @var{window-order} [Daniel M. German]

@item Docks/panels are unframed, and window type is set to @code{dock} by default [Timo Korvola]

@item You can exit from sawfish-client with @code{,quit} (also @code{C-d}), unlike @code{C-c} it won't kill the WM [Teika Kazura, Timo Korvola]

@item Number widget (GtkSpinButton) can take optional initial value [Teika Kazura]

@item Changing @code{raise-tabs-on-hover} takes effect immediately now [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Inactive windows in Crux theme do now have black text for better readability [Christopher Bratusek]

@item With new option @code{customize-redirect}, configurator's output can be redirected. [Teika Kazura]

@item Grow/Pack and Shrink/Yank options are in the same group now [Christopher Bratusek]

These commands are now available from window operation menu, too.

@item When moving a window the cursor shape is now @code{hand2}, when resizing @code{crosshair} [Christopher Bratusek]

@item In the theme document in the configurator, the cursor is invisible and the wrap mode is set to word-char [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Build, installation and source
@itemize +
@item Improved ebuild [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Encoding is unified to utf-8 for all distributed files [Teika Kazura]

@item Squashed all bytecompiler warnings [Matthew Love] @*
Some warnings were superfluous, though.

@item To info file @file{dir} the section @code{sawfish} has been added [Luis Rodrigo Gallardo Cruz]

@item Distclean rule for po/Makefile.in [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Removed ancient sawmill removal fragments from Makefile [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Block comments in lisp files are now semicolons @*
Sorry, without reason. Block comment remains allowed.
@end itemize

@item Docs
@itemize +
@item Added man-pages for @code{sawfish}, @code{sawfish-client} and @code{sawfish-config} [Debian]

@item News items for 1.5.0 are rewritten in a more readable fashion [Teika Kazura]

@item Info manual updates [Christopher Bratusek, Jeremy Hankins, Teika Kazura]

@item Added new contributors to @code{THANKS} section of @code{CONTRIBUTING} [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Updated OPTIONS and KEYBINDINGS [Christopher Bratusek]
@item Fixed the license header of tabbed-windowing files [Christopher Bratusek]
@end itemize

@end itemize
@end itemize

@heading 1.5.0 "The Hardstyle Factory"

The new release is Sawfish-1.5.0. We don't release 1.4 series for
historical reason. The next will be 1.6, and 1.5.x are for bugfix
branches.

@itemize @bullet

@item The 1.5.0 release has new features and bugfixes

@item New/Updated requirements:
@itemize @minus

@item librep 0.17 -> 0.90.0

@item rep-gtk 0.18.3 -> 0.18.4
@end itemize

@item User visible changes:
@itemize @minus
@item Fully renamed from ``sawmill'' to ``sawfish''

If your @file{.sawfishrc} has a line @code{(require 'sawmill-defaults)},
then change it to @code{(require 'sawfish-defaults)}.

If your configuration file is named @code{~/.sawmillrc}, then rename it
to @code{~/.sawfish/rc} or @code{~/.sawfishrc}.

@item Configurator GUI's default style is tree view of categories.

Configurator GUI (sawfish-ui) used to display categories in flat row,
but now arranges them in tree diagram.

To use the old style, put @code{(define-special-variable customize-program "sawfish-ui --flatten")} in your configuration file.
@end itemize

@item Bugs fixed:
@itemize @minus

@item Fixed an compilation-error caused by glib [Michal Jaegermann]

@item Make building with imlib1 instead of gdk-pixbuf work again [Michal Jaegermann]

@item Create src/build.h, since it has been missing before [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Fixed an "unknown remote error" that might appear [Alexey I. Froloff]

@item Make "make uninstall" work again [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Fixed the issue that apps did not start iconified, even if requested [Ian Zimmerman, Teika Kazura]

@item First create $datadir/applications, then install the desktop file [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Fixed default animation outline coordinates [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Don't ignore datarootdir setting [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Make Sawfish more error-tolerant if an app has an icomplete WM_CLASS [Martin Mares]

@item Make sure we don't mix Super and Hyper [Denis Barbier]

@item Fixup the last incomplete AC_DEFINE [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Fixed a speed-issue with ``microGUI'' theme [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Make properly use of WM_NAME in ``Elberg-tabbed'' theme [Christopher Bratusek]

@item UTF-8 Support in window menus [Wang Diancheng]

@item UTF-8 Support in GTK Widgets [Christopher Bratusek]
@end itemize

@item New features:
@itemize @minus

@item Tabbed Windowing Support [Yann Hodique, Scott Scriven, Nathan Froyd, Christopher Bratusek], Raise Tabs on hover [Christopher Bratusek]

Windows can be ``tabbed'', or multiple windows bound to one, sharing
size and frames. It's still under development (sorry). For instructions,
see our wiki site @url{http://sawfish.wikia.com/Tabs}.

@item Focus enhancements [Timo Korvola]

Improvements in focus are done from which KDE users will benefit.
Some new windows can receive focus. Some undesired focus transitions
to desktop windows are suppressed.

In enter-exit and enter-only focus modes, enter-notify events caused
by grab/ungrab are ignored. This has a bad side effect, too.

In lisp, replaced hardcoded focus logic by @code{focus-revert}
function. Previously, action when the focused transient window is
unmapped was not handled by focus modes, but coded elsewhere. Now
@code{focus-revert} event is invoked, and passed to focus modes. (For
detail, @pxref{Input Focus}.) This makes the modes' policy clear, and
programmable.

@item cursor warp enhancements. [Christopher Bratusek]

During window cycling, cursor is warped to the current top window if
@code{warp-to-window-enabled} and @code{cycle-raise-windows} are
non-nil.

When the window gets unmaximized, the cursor is retained in that
window when @code{warp-to-window-enabled} is non-nil.

@item 3 New Window-Animators for moving and resizing: cross, elliptical and draft [Christopher Bratusek, Teika Kazura (draft fixups)]

@item Shrinking/Yanking Support [Timo Korvola]

Shrink and yank are commands to reduce overlap with other windows ``by
one'', with a motion in direction left/right/up/down. ``Shrink''
commands move one edge of the window to shrink, and ``yank'' commands
move the window.

To use them, put @code{(require 'sawfish.wm.commands.shrink-yank)} in
your configuration file, and use the configurator GUI to bind commands
to keys.

@item ``Infinite Desktop'' Feature [David T. McWherter]

It makes the virtual desktop bigger than the screen, actually so big
that there's no limit. You can scroll it with mouse continuously in
natural manner.

This is in contrast to the coventional viewport; it scrolls
by a step of one screen size. Thus it may not work so well with
viewports.

To use it, put @code{(require 'sawfish.wm.ext.infinite-desktop)} in
your configuration file, and use configurator GUI.

@item In configurator GUI, viewport commands and history appear. Under matched-window, fixed-position, never-iconify, never-maximize are available. [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Added cycle-among-groups(,-backwards) commands (cycle among the most recently used window of groups) [Fernando Carmano Varo]

@item Interactive placement-mode now also for transients [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Improved prompt.jl (allows changing font, fg and bg color) [Sergey I. Sharybin]

@end itemize

@item Other changes:
@itemize @minus
@item To build with XFree86/X.Org < 7.0 add --without-xorg-x11r7 flag [Christopher Bratusek]

@item To build without Pango add --without-pango flag [Christopher Bratusek]

@item To prevent installing translations add --without-nls flag [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Set RestartStyleHint to 2 [Christian Marillat]

@item When matching window to alist try WM_NAME if WM_CLASS is unset [Christian Marillat]

@item Major Documentation update [Derek Upham, Teika Kazura]

@item New Sound Theme [glh Pimenta]

@item Added ebuild [Harald van Dijk]

@item Added session desktop file [Christopher Bratusek]

@item rep.m4 has been dropped use librep.pc/rep-gtk.pc instead [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Added sawfish.pc [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Improved Makefile's distclean rule [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Updated .desktop files for gnome-session >=2.23 [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Fixed autogen for libtool >2.2 [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Major configure script rework [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Don't ship config.sub config.guess and install-sh in $srcdir/etc [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Reworked Sawfish-UI [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Dropped libgnome|gnomeui|gnomecanvas widgets, use pure gtk instead [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Merged changes from sawfish-pager [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Major update of the spec file [Christopher Bratusek, Michal Jaegermann, Ritz]

@item Print usefull stuff at the end of configure [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Add distclean rule to all Makefiles [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Add KEYBINDINGS file, containing a list of all default keybindings [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Updated OPTIONS for all new options [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Cleaned Up Makedefs.in [Christopher Bratusek]

@item Move 'avoid' window-matcher from placement to state [Teika Kazura]

@item Updated compat.jl [Teika Kazura]

@item Removed all old ChangeLog files [Christohper Bratusek]

@item Make move-cursor.jl export all functions described in the doc [Christopher Bratusek]
@end itemize
@end itemize

@heading 1.3.5

@itemize @bullet

@item The 1.3.5 version has new features and bugfixes

@item New/Updated requirements:
@itemize @minus

@item librep 0.14 -> 0.17

@item rep-gtk 0.18 -> 0.18.3
@end itemize

@item New features:
@itemize @minus

@item Support _NET_WM_USER_TIME by Hellmut Eller

@item Added ATK-A11Y Support by Shobbit Marthur

@item Added Viewport-Boundary by Christopher Bratusek

@item Added Error-Handler "both" by Christopher Bratusek

@item Added 2 new Buttonlayouts to Crux "complete" and "complete inverse" by Christopher Bratusek

@item Honour ICCCM Aspect Ratio by Andrea Vettorello

@item Expose all Keybindings in SawfishUI by Christopher Bratusek

@item Added Animated Viewport Scrolling by Fernando Carmona Varo

@item Also expose the "Stagger" and "Off-Center" placement-modes

@item Add a new hook: "before-slide-hook" by Andrea Vettorello

@item Expose all smart placement-modes, "Best-Fit", "Best-Fit-Group", "First-Fit-Or-Interactively" by Christopher Bratusek

@item Better GNOME Integration by Christian Marillat
@end itemize

@item Bugfixes:
@itemize @minus

@item Minimum pango version is 1.8.0 not 1.16.0 by Christopher Bratusek

@item Fix Installation of mxflat by Michal Jaegermann
@end itemize

@item Other Changes:
@itemize @minus

@item Remove all ^L in the source by Teika Kazura

@item Small Code-cleanup to make build with "-Wall -ansi -pedantic" possible again (also requires recent librep for this to work)

@item Major Documentation Update by Derek Upham

@item updated the shipped config.sub and config.guess by Christopher Bratusek
@end itemize
@end itemize

@heading 1.3.4

@itemize @bullet

@item The 1.3.4 version has new features and bugfixes

@item New features:
@itemize @minus

@item "Enter-Click focus mode" by Dagfinn I. Mannsake, Christopher Bratusek and Timo Korvola: windows get focus only when mouse enters it or if it is clicked and was unfocused.

@item "Parallel make" by Harald van Dijk: allows building using more processors.

@item Improved window property handling by Teika Kazura.

@item Added new themes: mxflat, get-S-tabbed and elberg-tabbed.

@item Added new binding to maximize window fullscreen on all xinerama screens, by Jonathan Sambrook.

@end itemize

@item Bug fixes:
@itemize @minus

@item Fixed raise-lower window bug when using transparent windows with xcomposite extension, by Timo Korvola.

@item "Refresh icons" by Timo Korvola: when window changes its icon, the frame gets updated.

@item Major C part cleanup, removing compilation warnings, by Christopher Bratusek.

@item "Keep Focus on move-window-'direction'" by Mark Schreiber: allows moving windows around viewports without losing focus.

@item "Selfdefine xterm command" by Dagfinn I. Mannsaker: allow using custom xterm instead of hardcoded one.

@item "Update the Spec-file" by Ian Dall: update deprecated keywords.

@item "Fix make-pot" by Christopher Bratusek: the make-pot script works again.

@item Themer was removed, because rep-glade is not yet ported to glade2.

@item Added missing keyboard accelerators in window menu and Move and Resize entries, issue reported by Fernando Carmona Varo.

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 1.3.3

@itemize @bullet

@item The followup 1.3.3 version is released with bugfixes' fixes

@item Bug fixes:
@itemize @minus

@item "Utf 8 names fix" by Timo Korvola: window titles with UTF-8 working and
no openoffice crashes

@item "Pango draw() ignores font" by Yuuki Harano and Rodrigo Gallardo: allows
using pango fonts correctly.

@item "Titlebar updates" by Harald van Dijk and Timo Korvola: don't forget to
tell the running theme that window title length has changed.

@item "KDE tray fix 2" by Timo Korvola: KDE is not always using freedesktop.org
protocol so we need to adjust a few glitches.

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 1.3.2

@itemize @bullet

@item The 1.3.2 version is released with bugfixes submitted by sawfish community

@item Strings are re-encoded in UTF-8. Window titles will be set correctly
regardless of title encoding (Rodrigo Gallardo)

@item updated documentation to v0.12 (Derek Upham)

@item added Occitan Lanaguage (Yannig Marchegay)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item Nautilus desktop window can now restore its size properly (Rodrigo Gallardo)

@item Sawfish.desktop file now complies with freedesktop.org standard (Rodrigo Gallardo)

@item Fix select workspace to make sure it calls with right arguments (GSR)

@item Fix 64 bit client messages (Thadeu Lima de Souza Cascardo)

@item Don't display unneeded blank lines when window is opened by prompt
function (Sven Schoenung)

@item KDE system tray no longer fighs with sawfish to reparent a tray icon
(Timo Korvola)

@item Add bounds checking on _NET_CURRENT_DESKTOP requests (Timo Korvola)

@item QT applications no longer lose focus when menu is active (Harald van Dijk)

@item Corrected window placement in xinerama/dualhead when using
centered/centered-on-parent (Fuchur, with comments by Andrea Vettorello)

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 1.3.1

@itemize @bullet

@item The 1.3.1 version is released to let people know that Sawfish is being
revived by the community, and we are awaiting patches to be submitted
for incoming 1.3.2 release

@item John Harper resigns from Sawfish maintainership and Sawfish community takes
over. Janek Kozicki has SVN access, applies patches and makes releases.

@item new official Sawfish website @url{http://sawfish.wikia.com/}

@item updated documentation to v0.11 from Derek Upham

@item updated FAQ from Sawfish wiki

@item added tool for automatic screenshot generation for huge number of themes (Scott Scriven)

@item Add detection for Xrandr extension (Philip Langdale)

@item added Punjabi Lanaguage (Amanpreet Alam)

@item Makefile.in: install Sawfish.desktop unconditionally (John Harper)

@item generate sawfish.gtk.widgets.font from font.jl.in, define have_pango_xft
in the substitutions (John Harper)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item fixed possible buffer overflow in src/fonts.c (Yoshiaki Kasahara)

@item Updated Swedish translation (Daniel Nylander)

@item check for pango libs and flags (optional dependency)

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 1.3

@itemize @bullet

@item Implemented EMWH "show desktop" mode

@item Set client window gravity to @code{StaticGravity} while
reparenting windows (Michal Maruška)

@item Support EWMH @code{SKIP_TASKBAR} state (Chris Boyle, me)

@item Window history keys may have multiple properties (not enabled by
default for backwards compatibility, see @code{window-history-key}
variable)

@item More placement modes are now multihead-aware (Steve Hill)

@item Translation updates: el (Simos Xenitellis, Kostas Papadimas), de
(Christian Neumair), no (Kjartan Maraas), pt_BR (Alexandre Folle de
Menezes), am (Daniel Yacob), es (German Poo Caaman~o), uk (Maxim
Dzumanenko), sk (Stanislav Visnovsky)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item compile with Gtk 2.2

@item don't try to unfocus windows within the X error handler

@item don't cache frame objects while clicking in windows, they may get
garbage collected -- fixes "crash on shading" bug

@item set @code{_NET_WM_NAME} as @code{UTF8_STRING} type (Christian
Krause)

@item @file{save-session} is now called @file{gnome-session-save};
fallback to looking in @file{/usr/gnome} for menus

@item fixed typo in @code{adjust-position-for-gravity/y}
@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 1.2

@itemize @bullet

@item Added an @file{OPTIONS} file describing the variables that may be
customized

@item Some drawing optimizations: don't reinstall frame shape at each
redraw, turn off graphics exposures in all contexts

@item Added a cache for X properties to minimize server round-trips

@item Added support for Xft fonts

@item Color objects now store alpha as well as rgb data

@item Support useful parts of 1.1 NET WM spec; also fixed some bugs /
omissions in support for 1.0 spec (e.g. @code{_NET_WORKAREA})

@item Support for two dimensional workspace layouts and edge flipping
(Michael Toomin)

@item Translation updates (Dmitry G. Mastrukov, Jordi Mallach, Vincent
van Adrighem, Christian Rose, Stanislav Visnovsky, Daniel Yacob, Andras
Timar, Sava Chankov, Christian Neumair, Peteris Krisjanis, Gustavo
Noronha Silva, Christian Meyer, Fatih Demir, Hasbullah Bin Pit,
Christophe Fergeau)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item Don't pass null pointers to @code{accept ()}

@item Stacking list assertions no longer abort execution, they just
print an error message

@item Handle minimum-size hints that are zero

@item Understand the Pango font names that the Gtk2 font selector uses

@item Fixed bugs when iconifying sticky windows

@item When servicing configure-window requests, respect the window's
locked dimensions. Also handle moving in only one direction

@item @code{grow-pack} bug fixes (Daniel Pfeiffer)

@item Fixed some problems with fullscreen mode

@item Fixed some problems in the Gtk2 config tool

@item Other bug fixes (Greg Morris, Claudio Bley)

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 1.1

@itemize @bullet

@item Reorganized the customization options. Removed user levels.
Removed many obscure options (most are still available as lisp
variables, just not from the UI). Viewports are no longer available in
the UI

@item Updates to the @code{grow-pack} module (Kai Großjohann, Daniel
Pfeiffer)

@item In matched windows, boolean options can be turned off as well as
on (me, merlin)

@item New full screen maximization mode

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item Miscellaneous focus fixes

@item Be more selective about which X errors imply window deletion

@item Don't trigger a stacking-list assertion on logout

@item Check for window-ness in window-visibility (Michal Maru¹ka)

@item Reread WM_WINDOW_PROTOCOLS when it changes

@item Fixed bug of nautilus windows not being focused in focus follows
mouse modes

@item Recover "lost" windows when selecting windows (merlin)

@item Show correct size when resizing windows (merlin)

@item Most placement modes now respect workarea (Federico Mena
Quintero, me)

@item Miscellaneous fixes to wm-spec implementation. Includes code to
support _NET_WM_STRUT

@item Call @code{bindtextdomaincodeset} function if rep implements it
(Christophe Fergeau)

@item Make the current-directory stored in the session a valid filename

@item Don't put windows below the default depth just because their
parent is

@item Miscellaneous viewport fixes (Federico Mena Quintero)

@item Don't let ``transients above'' and ``layer'' stacking constraints
conflict with one another

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 1.0.1

@itemize @bullet

@item Translation updates: pt (Carlos Perelló Marín), it (Michele
Campeotto), pl (Zbigniew Chyla), zh_CN (Wang Jian), zh_TW (Abel
Cheung), es (Eneko Lacunza), tr (Ömer Fadýl USTA), sv (Göran Uddeborg,
Christian Rose), da (Ole Laursen), gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item Fixed typo in @code{apply-command-keys} function (David Bustos)

@item Fixed bug in @code{wm-spec} module causing nautilus desktop
window to cover panel

@item Adopt windows with a maximized hint correctly

@item Fixed bug in @code{display-window} function that can prevent the
window getting focused

@item Don't allow windows to be moved or resized by third-parties when
they're maximized (and the necessary option is set)

@item Fixed problem with localizing property names in the
matched-windows configuration widget

@item Handle window gravity more correctly (Owen Taylor)

@item Forget everything about withdrawn windows -- better ICCCM
compliance

@item Fixed root-window event proxying (the infamous gmc bug)

@item Don't use dlmalloc on sparcs (Brian Nitz)

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.99

@itemize @bullet

@item Requires @code{librep} 0.14 or newer

@item Translation updates: ja (Sato Satoru), no (Kjartan Maraas), es
(Carlos Perelló Marín), fi (Antti Ahvensalmi), cs (Jiri Cerny), fr
(Christian Marillat), de (Matthias Warkus, Christian Meyer), da (Ole
Laursen), sk (Stanislav Visnovsky), tr (Özgür), sv (Christian Rose,
Peter Winnberg), gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez)

@item Do i18n on more text strings (Vlad Harchev, me)

@item Broken support for multiple-screen displays. Supplying the new
@samp{--multihead} option will fork extra copies of sawfish for each
extra screen. This has some fundamental problems, but some people seem
to want it (Michael Vogt, Mahmood Ali, me)

@item Window manager virtual modifier once again defaults to @kbd{M-}
instead of @kbd{C-}

@item Added support for @kbd{Off2} and @kbd{Off3} events

@item @code{menu-program-stays-running} variable now defaults to true
by popular demand

@item New command @code{focus-desktop}

@item Switch viewports more efficiently (by choosing the best order to
move windows, to minimize the exposed area)

@item Monitor the @code{_WIN_WORKSPACE} property of each window

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus
@item Check for X SHAPE extension, exit if it's not available

@item Wait for the focus-in event before changing sawfish's knowledge
of the focused window when moving focus from one window to another

@item Be more ICCCM-compliant, don't send synthetic configure notify
events when the window was resized

@item Fixed locale font handling

@item Don't leave grid traces when trying to move/resize a window
that's locked in place

@item Fixed bug where the pointer being over the message window could
confuse focus after window cycling

@item @code{decorate-transients} option works again with shaded windows

@item Documentation appears in tooltips again

@item Handle sticky properties better in the @code{window-history}
module

@item Maximization fixes for multi-headed displays (Florent Guillaume)

@item Cancelling a resize of a maximized window no longer discards the
window's maximized state

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.38

@itemize @bullet

@item Translation updates: gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez), sv (Martin
Norbäck), de (Matthias Warkus, Christian Meyer), ru (Vlad Harchev), es
(Joseba García Etxebarria), pl (Daniel Koc), fi (Antti Ahvensalmi), sk
(Stanislav Visnovsky), az (Pablo Saratxaga), cz (Stanislav Brabec), no
(Kjartan Maraas), el (Simos Xenitellis), it (Michele Campeotto), fr
(Christian Marillat), ro (Marius Andreiana), ko (?)

Extract some more translatable strings (Vlad Harchev)

@item @code{Crux} theme now has an extra button mode: @code{Default},
like Mac OS Platinum but also has an iconify button. Used by default

@item The @code{grow-pack} module now works with windows which specify
increments (Kai Großjohann)

@item New command @code{kill-client}

@item Fixed bugs:

@itemize @minus

@item Don't return a null pointer when no default cursor has been set,
return @code{nil} instead

@item Avoid triggering assertions in the stacking list code when
raising or lowering windows and the given sibling has been destroyed

@item Turned off the annoying code that beeps and prints a message when
unfocusable windows are detected

@item The GNOME hints now listen for the @code{_WIN_WORKSPACE} property
changing and will move the window in response

@item Don't forget maximized state of windows when they're moved, only
if they're resized

@item Don't show special cursors when moving or resizing windows, or
when hovering over the title bar

@item Corrected off-by-one error in `smart' placement modes

@item Identified and fixed some problems in the new GNOME/KDE window
manager hints implementation (Rob Hodges, me)

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.37

@itemize @bullet

@item New command line option @samp{--window-history-file=@var{file}}

@item Search for user's rc file in this order: @file{~/.sawfishrc},
@file{~/.sawfish/rc}, @file{~/.sawmillrc}

@item New option @code{configure-ignore-stacking-requests} and a
similarly-named window property. When set stacking requests from
windows are ignored (Matt Tucker)

@item When restarting sawfish, reselect the previously selected
workspace

@item Added a function that can recolour multiple image channels
simultaneously

@item New function @code{exit-type} -- returns the type of exit in
progress

@item Translation updates: ja (Sato Satoru), sk (Stanislav Visnovsky),
es (Iñaki García Etxebarria), hu (Robert Vanyi), tr (Fatih Demir), ro
(Tutu Valentin), no (Kjartan Maraas), it (Michele Campeotto), pl
(Daniel Koc)

@item Fixed bugs:

@itemize @minus

@item Fixed focus-handling in enter-only mode on window close and
viewport switch

@item Fixed overflow error in the image recolouring module (Simon
Budig)

@item Session management always uses a unique session file (Timo
Korvola, me)

@item Fixed bug in random placement mode where windows could sometimes
be placed off-screen

@item Fixed some auto-raise problems by reverting a misguided bug fix

@item Fixed bugs with aborted session saves

@item Cache stacking order of windows locally -- this allows us to keep
the order consistent, especially after window reparenting operations

@item Don't call @code{XParseColor} unless we actually @emph{have} a
display connection (merlin)

@item Merged two calls to @code{setlocale} to avoid trashing the locale
preferences

@item Check for presence of Xinerama extension before trying to use it
-- removes the annoying error message at startup

@item Added some more X server timestamp logic to correct for the
timestamp discontinuities after APM resume

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.36

@itemize @bullet

@item Added a new default theme: `Crux'. By default it recolours itself
to match the current GTK+ selection colour. (Arlo Rose, me)

@item Updated translations: it (Michele Campeotto), fr (Christian
Marillat)

@item Added a @code{shade-button} button class (many themes created it
anyway)

@item Added a @code{sawfish.wm.util.recolor-image} module, currently
contains a single function for recolouring parts of images based on a
given colour gradient

@item Added new command @code{delete-group}. Deletes a whole group of
windows. With default bindings, shift-click on the close button to
invoke this command

@item Added support for KDE-style mini-icons. If the window has no
normal icon, then @code{window-icon-image} will return the mini-icon

@item Fixed bugs:

@itemize @minus

@item Themes that use the module for reading the user's gtk preferences
will once again get updated when the gtk theme changes

@item Fix another of the null-string translation bugs (Christian
Marillat)

@item Work around @code{XUrgencyHint} not being defined before X11R6

@item Fixed some long-standing bugs when decorating windows (use the
correct mask when creating the overall window shape; for frame parts
with no mask, set the local shape to the appropriate rectangle; be sure
to generate at least one Expose event when reconfiguring frame parts)

@item Fixed crashing bug when @code{bind-keys} is called with zero
arguments

@item Fixed typo in @code{crop-image} function when checking validity
of @var{height} parameter (martin@@whoever.com)

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.35

@itemize @bullet

@item Translation updates: ja (SATO Satoru), it (Michele Campeotto),
zh_TW.Big5 (Chun-Chung Chen), pl (Daniel Koc), sk (Stanislav Visnovsky)

@item Items in @code{choice} widgets may now contain descriptive names,
syntax is @code{(@var{symbol} "@var{description}")}

@item Changed @code{focus-windows-when-mapped} option to only apply to
non-transient windows (this option is now enabled by default)

@item New placement modes @code{top-left} and @code{off-center}.
@code{top-left} is now the default mode for non-transients

@item Enabled the module supporting the newly standardized GNOME/KDE
window manager hints. Also made random changes to support KDE2 a lot
better

@item Added WM_PROTOCOLS @code{_SAWFISH_WM_RAISE_WINDOW} and
@code{_SAWFISH_WM_LOWER_WINDOW}. Used by @code{maybe-raise-window} and
@code{maybe-lower-window} functions.

These are similar to @code{WM_TAKE_FOCUS}, in that if the window
supports the protocol, it's up to it whether or not it raises (or
lowers) the window in question. These functions should only be used
where the user hasn't explicitly requested the restacking

An example usage is an application that doesn't want its window to be
raised due to a button-press event that initiates a drag operation

@item New option @code{menus-include-shortcuts}, disabled by default
(Unai Uribarri)

@item Don't interpret windows with @code{WM_TRANSIENT_FOR} set to the
root window as children of all windows in the group (it causes too many
annoying effects), instead just decorate these windows as transients

@item Handle @code{group} and @code{transient} iconification modes
better, don't use a recursive method, instead use one pass to identify
the windows to change, then another to make the changes. In
@code{transients} mode, only change the state of shared transients if
they will have no visible parents afterwards

@item In the (old) GNOME hints code, support a @code{_WIN_HINTS} client
message (with a similar format to the @code{_WIN_STATE} message)

@item New module @code{sawfish.wm.commands.viewport-extras}, some
commands for viewport for viewport navigation (Dams Nadé)

@item Check for @code{never-iconify} and @code{never-maximize}
window properties when appropriate

@item Support sixth and seventh mouse buttons (Steve Haslam)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item Fixed problems with reverting changes to list-based options

@item Don't allow the empty list as a valid modifier list

@item Fixed bug where restarting the wm with
@code{focus-windows-when-mapped} set would cause any shaded windows to
be deleted

@item Ignore iconified windows in the grow-pack code

@item Added @code{font-ascent} and @code{font-descent} functions to the
gaol

@item Catch errors when loading site-init and rep-defaults files

@item Don't use @code{""} to denote a null doc string (which has bad
side effects when internationalized)

@item Don't need to run @samp{sawfish-client -} to get a repl anymore,
just @samp{sawfish-client}

@item Fixed bugs in @code{composite-images} function

@item Fixed ordering of states output by @code{gtk-style} program
(michaelj@@maine.rr.com)

@item Fixed grabbing mono window icons in gdk-pixbuf mode

@item Reject button event descriptions that don't specify at least one
mouse button

@item Accept @code{()} as a valid image modifier color component

@item Now grabs translatable strings from @code{defgroup} forms
correctly

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.34

@itemize @bullet

@item Added a virtual modifier key, the @kbd{W-} modifier. This
modifier is used for all standard window-manager key bindings, it may
be set to any of the standard X modifiers using the configuration tool

@item Optionally show window-icons when cycling through windows (Unai
Uribarri Rodríguez, me)

@item Event handlers for low-level X windows now get passed the window
as their second argument (Unai Uribarri Rodríguez)

@item Translation updates: fr (Christian Marillat), sv (Richard Hult),
pt_BR (Flávio Bruno Leitner), it (Michele Campeotto)

@item Error handler module (@code{sawfish.wm.ext.error-handler}). When
loaded it records the most recent errors, and the time at which they
occurred. Use the @code{display-errors} command to display all recorded
errors.

@item Added an option to not save window-history data for transient
windows. Also added a @code{window-history-clear} command to forget
history for all windows.

@item Rearranged window operations menu to hopefully be clearer

@item Attempt to catch and handle errors while loading custom options

@item Labels in menu items can now be functions, they should return the
label text when called (with any menu arguments)

@item Moved installed message catalogues to $datadir/locale

@item @code{defcustom} forms may now a @code{:widget-flags} keyword, a
constant list of symbols passed to the configuration tool. Current
flags include: @code{expand-vertically} and @code{expand-horizontally}

@item Added a @code{sawfish.wm.util.ping} module, it implements the
@code{_NET_WM_PING} protocol of the new window manager spec.

@item @code{destroy-notify-hook} is no longer called asynchronously

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus

@item Fixed various bugs when dragging/resizing windows

@item Reverted the changes to make the click-to-focus click-through
setting apply to window decorations

@item Fixed bug when handling 32-bit data in client messages and X
properties

@item Fixed window-focus problems when switching viewports

@item Many bug-fixes to handling of maximized window state. Maximized
state should now be preserved across wm and session restarts. It's also
saved in the window-history attributes

@item Support the function hints of the MWM window manager properties

@item Updated the @code{sawfish.wm.state.wm-spec} module to match the
current (almost final) draft of the new GNOME/KDE window manager spec

@item Fixed sporadic stacking bugs when unmapped windows exist

@item Fixed miscellaneous click-to-focus and focus-click-through
related bugs

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.33

@itemize @bullet

@item Added support for user-levels associated with individual commands

@item The GNOME hints code now understands that the do-not-cover flag
is the same as sawfish's @code{avoid} property

@item Swap properties of sticky windows when entering and leaving
workspaces as for normal windows (fixes the old problem where sticky
windows can grab focus when a workspace is entered)

@item Changed the default settings of some customization options,
hopefully to give a more ``conventional'' feel for new users

@item Better support for Xinerama (Geoff Reedy)

@item Added a new set of window stacking commands: @code{raise-window},
@code{lower-window}, @code{raise-lower-window}. The set of windows
affected by these commands is determined by the @code{user-raise-type}
(either the individual window, the window and any transients, or the
entire group). The old commands of these names are now called
@code{@var{foo}-single-window}.

Most modules now use these commands when raising or lowering windows,
allowing the stacking model to be configured globally.

@item Translation updates: no (Kjartan Maraas), fi (Antti Ahvensalmi),
it (Christopher R. Gabriel), pt_BR (Douglas Moura Ferreira), uk (Yuri
Syrota), de (Matthias Warkus)

@item Fixed bugs:

@itemize @minus

@item If committing changes in the configurator causes new
customization options or groups to be added, update the UI to reflect
this

@item Added code to detect and correct the sporadic bug where windows
become unfocusable in click-to-focus mode

@item Sanitized how the focus gets passed to and from transient windows
(when passing focus back from a transient, give it to the most recently
focused window in the group, not the transient's parent)

Also, try to avoid displaying maximize buttons in windows whose hints
prevent them from being maximized

@item Many fixes to how maximized windows are handled across session
and window manager restarts. Also support GNOME window maximized hints
when windows are created

@item Fixed some bugs in the @code{wm-spec} module

@item Don't trigger auto-raise hooks on leave/enter events generated by
pointer grabs

@item The @code{edge-flip-delay} option now applies when dragging
windows

@item Fixed the preview command in @code{sawfish-themer}

@item Miscellaneous fixes to the ``smart'' window placement modes

@item Fixed type description of @code{persisitent-group-ids} option

@item In @code{enter-exit} focus mode, focus isn't removed due to
enter/leave events due to pointer grabs (fixes the bug with Mozilla URL
completion)

@item Fixed (again) the @code{focus-click-through} behaviour with
respect to frame decorations

@item Re-added hack to make GMC icons unfocusable

@item Fixed interactive placement to check for window destruction
(merlin)

@item Fixed bug with tiled images with shapes (the shape mask would
always be applied an integer number of times, ignoring the size of the
frame part it's associated with)

@item Fixed @code{window-wants-input-p} to check if the
@code{InputHint} is set before reading the value

@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.32

@itemize @bullet

@item @kbd{M-TAB} window cycling now works in both directions, bind
keys to @code{@var{cycle-command}-backwards}, e.g.
@code{cycle-windows-backwards} (Merlin, me)

@item Added support for X `Urgency' hint: @code{window-urgent-p} and
@code{window-state-change-hook} is called with @code{urgency} state
when it changes

@item Some improvements to @code{shade-hover} mode (adapted from Eli
Barzilay)

@item Functions that raise/lower groups of windows now generate the
minimum number of expose events (Rob Hodges, me)

@item New window property @code{window-list-skip}. Unified with GNOME
skip-winlist hint

@item Custom options may have tooltips, use @code{:tooltip} tag

@item Catch errors when applying custom changes and revert to previous
state

@item Translation updates: uk (Yuri Syrota), pt_BR (Douglas Moura
Ferreira), hu (Róbert Ványi), de (Christian Meyer), ja (SATO Satoru),
da (Keld Jørn Simonsen), es (Iñaki García Etxebarria), fr (Christian
Marillat)

@item Fixed bugs:

@itemize @minus
@item With click-to-focus in non-click-through mode, don't
click-through into window decorations

@item @code{dimensions} property in window matching was called
@code{size} by mistake

@item Export the various @code{sp-cost:} functions from
the @code{sawfish.wm.placement.smart} module

@item Don't allow cycles in the transient-for relationship

@item Fixed some maximize bugs

@item GNOME skip-focus property no longer causes the window to be
unfocusable, just uncyclable-to

@item Coerce auto-raise timeout to be at least one millisecond; support
@code{disable-auto-raise} correctly

@item Window input hints defaults to true not false

@item Fixed typo when loading the defaults file (Ronald Wahl)

@item Fixed command spec of @code{move-window-@var{foo}} commands
(Yoshiki Hayashi)

@item When sending @code{WM_TAKE_FOCUS} message, only focus the window
if its `Input' hint is set
@end itemize

@end itemize


@heading 0.31.1

@itemize @bullet

@item Translation updates: da (Kenneth Christiansen), de (Christian
Meyer), no (Kjartan Maraas), pt_BR (Rui Miguel Silva Seabra), sv (Johan
Dahlin), uk (Yuri Syrota)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus
@item Fixed typos in @code{sawfish.wm.gnome.integration} and
@code{sawfish-themer} (Christian Marillat)

@item Fixed bug when building on Tru64 (John H. Palmieri)

@item Remember to check return value when initializing Imlib
@end itemize

@end itemize


@heading 0.31

@itemize @bullet

@item Requires librep version @code{0.13}

@item Organized all lisp code into a hierarchy of modules. Root points
are @code{sawfish.wm} for window manager code, @code{sawfish.ui} for
configurator and @code{sawfish.gtk} for GTK+ utilities

Compatibility should have been preserved as far as possible, through
the use of module aliases. The @code{user} module that unmodularized
user code is loaded in should look very similar to the old environment.
However, code using private functions, probably will not work

New features written as modules can either import modules individually,
or just open @code{sawfish.wm} to get the core functionality

@item All command handling is now written in Lisp. It's fully
compatible except for how commands are defined. Since there is no
longer a unified namespace the mapping from names to command
definitions is maintained separately.

@code{define-command} and @code{autoload-command} add entries to this
mapping. @code{define-command} takes a name and a function (and some
other optional arguments). The old style of defining commands still
works, but only in the user module

@item @code{sawfish-client} now provides the same repl as the normal
@code{rep} program. E.g. this allows the module system to be easily
inspected

Also, the module of each loaded theme is available for inspection under
@code{themes.@var{theme-name}}. (With themes using top-level defines
instead of a single @code{let*} block, this is useful for debugging)

@item @code{sawfish.client} module provides lisp functions for
communicating with a running window manager. Also, the protocol has
been modified to support proper communication of errors, which are then
re-raised on the client-side. This should make debugging client-server
code more obvious

@item `Action' parts of menu items may now be lisp objects that don't
have a read syntax. (E.g. this allows closures to be used, avoiding the
problems arising from modularization)

@item Support for checked and radio-group menu items. Also a new
function @code{add-window-menu-toggle} to add items to the
@samp{Toggle} sub-menu of each window

@item Handle @code{ConfigureRequest} events in a way that is compliant
with the ICCCM---honour the window's @code{win_gravity} setting
(defaulting to @code{NorthWest} gravity), instead of assuming
@code{Static} gravity

@item Support more GC attributes in the @code{sawfish.wm.util.x} plugin
(Ryan Pavlik)

@item Support for handling arbitrary windows as extra ``root'' windows.
Used, e.g., to support Nautilus' desktop window. Allows the focus modes
to work correctly

To support this, new window property @code{desktop} denoting a
``desktop'' window; new function @code{desktop-window-p} recognizing
one of these things (or the symbol @code{root})

@item Added @code{pointer-motion-threshold} option. Pointer motion
events are only generated when the pointer moves at this many pixes
away from the position it had when the button was pressed

@item New functions: @code{scale-image}, @code{composite-images}, and
@code{crop-image}.

@item New option @code{maximize-avoid-avoided} (Jonas Linde)

@item New functions exported by @code{sawfish.wm.ext.tooltips} module:
@code{display-tooltip}, @code{remove-tooltip}

@item New function exported from @code{sawfish.wm.viewports} module:
@code{select-workspace-and-viewport}. Renamed some workspace functions:

@noindent
@code{ws-move-window} @result{} @code{move-window-to-workspace},
@code{ws-copy-window} @result{} @code{copy-window-to-workspace},
@code{ws-insert-workspace} @result{} @code{insert-workspace},
@code{ws-move-workspace} @result{} @code{move-workspace},
@code{ws-remove-window} @result{} @code{remove-workspace}.

@item Changed interface of @code{get-visible-window-edges} function to
use proper keyword parameters, and added some new keywords

@item New commands @code{help:about} and @code{gnome-about}. Added a
@code{sawfish-about} script to implement the first of these. Added
associate menu items to the `Help' menu

@item New window property @code{cycle-skip}, defines whether the window
is included when cycling the focused window. (Dave Dribin, me)

@item Translation additions and updates: es (Iñaki García Etxebarria),
tr (Fatih Demir), zh_CN.GB2312 (zw@@zhaoway.com), fr (Christian
Marillat), ja (SATO Satoru), de (Kai Lahmann), el (Simos Xenitellis),
ga (Seán Ó Ceallaigh), ru (Valek Filippov), sl (Andraz Tori)

@item Bug fixes:

@itemize @minus
@item Don't let errors in @file{.sawfishrc} prevent customization
settings being loaded

@item initialize event handler when creating X window proxies (Matt
Tucker)

@item No longer able to @code{throw} out the top of the program by
mistake

@item Fixed @code{find-head} function, to allow Xinerama support to
work

@item When exiting, leave window configurations exactly as they were
found (E. Jay Berkenbilt)

@item Fixed @code{synthesize-event} to scan the window tree for a child
window accepting button events (E. Jay Berkenbilt)

@item Removed ``yow! @dots{}'' debugging messages

@item @code{image-set} and related functions will add an alpha channel
to the image when necessary (when using gdk-pixbuf)

@item Canonify @kbd{S-x} as @kbd{X} where possible

@item Catch and handle errors when matching properties in the
@code{sawfish.wm.ext.match-window}

@item Escape underscores in menu items where they shouldn't introduce
accelerators. (Added @code{quote-menu-item} function to help with this)

@item Fixed race-condition when exiting configurator embedded into the
GNOME control center (Havoc Pennington, me)

@item Fixed bug in @code{set} method of the @code{icon} widget

@item Fixed shading behaviour of included themes (Daniel Lundell)

@item Compute the shape of the frame window each time the background of
one of its parts changes
@end itemize
@end itemize


@heading 0.30.3

@itemize @bullet

@item If a frame part has a non-nil @code{hidden} attribute, ignore it

@item When reframing windows, keep the absolute position of the client
window constant

@item Support @code{FIXED_POSITION} GNOME hint (renamed old
@code{fixed-position} property as @code{client-set-position};
@code{fixed-position} now means don't allow the window to be moved by
the user)

@item @code{transients-above} option can now be set per-window

@item Translation updates: fr (Christian Marillat), en_GB (Robert
Brady), de (Kai Lahmann), da (Keld Simonsen), ru (Valek Filippov), sl
(Andraz Tori), no (Kjartan Maraas), gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez), it
(Michele Campeotto)

@item Fixed bugs when converting option values

@item Fixed @code{:require} keyword in @code{defcustom} always causing
the module to be loaded, not just when the option is non-nil

@item Fixed bug when adding windows that are shaded

@item Fixed some minor bugs in the configurator

@end itemize


@heading 0.30.2

@itemize @bullet

@item Window cycling now forwards terminating events to external
applications as well as internal bindings (e.g. @kbd{M-TAB M-w} closes
an activated Netscape window)

@item @code{quote-event} command now works with applications that
ignore synthetic events (adapted from code by Timo Korvola)

@item Reorganized frame style and window type management. New function
@code{define-frame-type-mapper} allows modules to affect the mapping
from window type to frame type. E.g. the shading module uses this.
(fixes the bug that changing the frame type of a shaded window didn't
work)

@item Added function @code{variable-customized-p}; use this to avoid
redefining user-modified options

@item Do type-directed deep conversion of values when converting
to/from readable representations. This fixes the bug that options with
@code{:type (optional color)} weren't being converted when passed
between the wm and the configurator, leading to reader errors

A side-effect of this is that updated custom files will not be
compatible with previous versions of the wm (though old custom files
will work with new versions)

@item Translation updates: no (Kjartan Maraas), de (Kai Lahmann), nl
(Dennis Smit), sl (Andraz Tori)

@item Added primitives @code{map-windows} and @code{filter-windows}

@item Fixed bug of not retaining focus on startup when originally in
PointerRoot mode and moving to click-to-focus mode (Brad Thompson)

@item Ensure that apps get sent a synthetic ConfigureNotify event after
ConfigureRequest events are handled (fixes bug where menus in Java apps
can appear at wrong position until window is moved)

@item When referencing known variables from subroutines, make sure that
restricted environment doesn't prevent the variable being accessed
(fixes bug where @code{default-bevel-percent} was being ignored)

@item When creating transient groups, don't compare null group ids
(fixes xfmail related bugs)

@item Fixed @code{move-window-to-viewport} command to correct for
1@dots{} indexing

@item Fixed non-gnome workspace widget in configurator

@end itemize


@heading 0.30

@itemize @bullet

@item New commands @code{activate-viewport-column},
@code{activate-viewport-row}

@item New commands @code{raise-window-and-transients},
@code{lower-window-and-transients} and
@code{raise-lower-window-and-transients},
@code{raise-transients-and-pass-through-click}.

As the normal window stacking commands, but restacks the
``transient-group'' of the window. This includes the window itself and
any transients it has, and any windows that it itself is a transient
of.

These commands are used in the default keymaps

@item Functions that deal with transient windows now understand the de
facto standard of setting the @code{WM_TRANSIENT_FOR} property to the
root window denotes that the window is a transient for the whole group

@item New image manipulation functions: @code{image-ref},
@code{image-set}, @code{image-fill}, @code{image-map}. New color
accessor function @code{color-rgb-8}. New function
@code{root-window-id}

@item Improvements to @code{sawfish-ui}: optionally use some GNOME
widgets, more lisp widget types, some bug fixes

@item New command @code{command-sequence}. Allows individual bindings
to invoke a sequence of commands

@item Options @code{iconify-group-mode} and @code{uniconify-group-mode}
replace @code{iconify-whole-group} and @code{uniconify-whole-group}.
New commands @code{iconify-transient-group}, and
@code{uniconify-transient-group}

@item Added @code{:type*} key to @code{defcustom}, like @code{:type},
but value is left unquoted

@item Translation updates: pl (Daniel Koc), ru (Valek Filippov), uk
(Yuri Syrota), es (Iñaki García Etxebarria)

@item Fixed handling of @code{WM_NORMAL_HINTS} (was using base-size
instead of min-size in places)

@item Fixed further locale / FontSet bug (Tomohiro KUBOTA)

@item @code{window-history} module won't resize a window to a size that
violates its size constraints

@end itemize


@heading 0.29

@itemize @bullet

@item Rewrote the configuration user interface. Improvements include:

@itemize @minus
@item Key bindings may now include parameters. E.g. this finally allows
shell commands to be bound to keys using the GUI (use the new
@code{run-shell-command} command)

@item Nautilus-like user-levels to tailor the options shown to the
expertise of the user

@item Options may have much richer type descriptions (including
@code{match-window} options). Also, extra widget types and containers
may be added as extra Lisp modules

@item By default the stand-alone configurator commits changes to the
window manager as they are made, instead of waiting for the @samp{Try}
button to be pressed

@item Added dependences---options with dependences are only editable
when the value of their dependence is non-@code{nil}
@end itemize

@item Rewrote window stacking code to be based on ``stacking
predicates''---functions that accept or reject a possible stacking
configuration. This allows the ``stack-transients-above-parents''
option to work correctly, only keeping transient windows above their
@emph{own} parent windows

@item The configure-event handler now understands and handles the full
complexity of stacking requests (Brad Thompson)

@item New frame-part attribute: @code{scale-foreground}. The
@code{cursor} attribute may now be a function

@item Made the @code{centered}, @code{centered-on-parent} and
@code{under-pointer} placement modes clamp the window into the current
work area (i.e. without overlapping windows that shouldn't be covered).
Added a @code{stagger} placement mode

@item When grabbing window icons to images, preserve their shape masks

@item Moved @code{window-history} options to @code{placement} group.
Fixed some more bugs and sub-optimal default option values

@item Don't set cursors for button classes, use the default value

@item GNOME @code{SKIP_FOCUS} window hint sets @code{never-focus}
property on window, as well as the @code{ignored} property

@item Translation updates: de (Karl Eichwalder), ru (Valek Filippov),
da (Kenneth Christiansen)

@item Added mostly-complete support for using gdk-pixbuf instead of
Imlib (requires an experimental Xlib version of the gdk-pixbuf library)

@item Various bug fixes and other minor changes@dots{}

@end itemize


@heading 0.28.1

@itemize @bullet

@item New options @samp{--visual=@var{TYPE}} and
@samp{--depth=@var{DEPTH}}. These tell the window manager to use a
different visual than the default

@item Made the @code{window-history} module behave more sanely (don't
save iconified or shaded state; include window name when generating
keys for transient windows)

@item Made @code{beos-window-module} the standard window menu (require
@code{old-window-menu} to get the original version). Also made this
display the windows' class names

@item Updated translations: es (Iñaki García Etxebarria), tr (Fatih
Demir)

@end itemize


@heading 0.28

@itemize @bullet

@item New module @code{window-history}---automatically saves window
attributes when they are explicitly set by the user, then copies these
attributes to windows with the same @code{WM_CLASS} as they are
created. This is loaded automatically if you have no @file{.sawfishrc}

@item New method of allowing themes to implement only some of the
(currently) four frame types. The variable
@code{frame-type-fallback-alist} maps each frame type to the type to
try if the original type isn't available in the chosen frame style.

Note that for this to work, themes must return @code{nil} when they
don't support the requested frame type, until now, the convention had
been to return the default frame definition, so most if not all themes
will need changing. (This doesn't include themes created using the
@code{make-theme} module.)

@item Made the metrics used by the @code{best-fit} placement mode
user-controllable. Set the @code{sp-cost-components} variable to a list
of cost functions and the weight to apply to that metric. E.g. by
default it gives 50% importance to the distance from the placement to
the focused window, and 25% each to the distance to the pointer and to
the ``future-unusefulness'' of the area being covered

@item New module @code{beos-window-menu} to redefine the window menu to
group items by the window group that they are a member of (in the
absence of actual group information, it will heuristically build groups
by matching window titles)

@item New option @code{edge-flip-warp-pointer}, whether or not to warp
the pointer after edge-flipping (Paul Warren)

@item New option @code{display-window:uniconify-to-current-workspace},
controls whether windows uniconified by @code{display-window} should be
moved to the current workspace (John N S Gill)

@item Changed method of selecting when to use multi-byte aware
rendering functions (except when initializing the locale fails, or
returns a 7-bit locale); also, when creating a fontset fails, try to
intelligently fall back to a similar group of fonts (Tomohiro Kubota)

@item The @code{x} library now supports creating and then drawing to
pixmaps. The pixmaps can then be grabbed to images using the
@code{make-image-from-x-drawable} function

@item Added a @samp{Help} item to the root menu

@item Translation updates: fi (Antti Ahvensalmi), gl (Jesus Bravo
Alvarez), de (Karl Eichwalder), nl (Jan Nieuwenhuizen), pl (Daniel
Koc), tr (Fatih Demir)

@item Now supports the @kbd{Super} modifier

@item Fixed bug of sometimes ignoring pending X events

@item Fixed bug of calling focus change hooks too many times (only when
our view of the focused window has actually changed)

@item Avoid problems when windows set weird size hints structures

@item Raise windows @emph{after} possibly moving them to a different
layer, when they have been mapped

@item When the @code{cycle-windows} sequence is terminated by an
unknown event, re-handle that event after exiting (so that e.g.
@kbd{M-TAB} can be followed by another @kbd{M-} qualified event without
releasing Meta)

@end itemize


@heading 0.27.2

@itemize @bullet

@item Translation updates: da (Kenneth Christiansen), de (Karl
Eichwalder), es (Iñaki García Etxebarria), ja (SATO Satoru)

@item Attempt to destructure the language code when parsing GNOME
desktop items (e.g. if @samp{LANG=de_DE} look for both @samp{de_DE} and
@samp{de} translations)

@item New focus handler events @code{enter-root} and @code{leave-root}

@item Removed @code{raise-groups-on-focus} option, it caused unstable
window flickering in certain cases

@item Fixed bug When transferring focus after a window is unmapped
(inverted choice of when to look under pointer, and when to look in
focus history)

@end itemize


@heading 0.27

@itemize @bullet

@item Changed the name from @samp{sawmill} to @samp{sawfish}; all
user-visible binaries have been renamed appropriately, the old programs
will still work for now@dots{}

@item Added support for accelerators in menu definitions (this requires
a new rep-gtk package) (Richard Kilgore). Added accelerators to many of
the standard menu items

@item Added some (untested) support for Xinerama: @code{current-head},
@code{current-head-dimensions}, @code{current-head-offset}. Some
placement modes should handle multiple heads sensibly, as should window
maximization and edge snapping.

@item Added icons for GNOME control center applets (all icons by
Tigert, except for the saw-blade logo by Glyph Lefkowitz)

@item New functions @code{map-window-properties} (me),
@code{window-icon-image} (Bruce Miller)

@item Changed behaviour of @code{raise-group} and @code{lower-group} to
preserve the stacking of the group, then change the selected window.
Added new command @code{raise-lower-group}

@item New option @code{raise-groups-on-focus}

@item Updated translations: de (Hubert Nachbaur), es (Iñaki García
Etxebarria), gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez), ko
(Man-Yong Lee), tr (Fatih Demir)

@item Try to handle errors more gracefully when creating window frames

@item Better handling of errors in the control center applet

@item Fixed the @code{below-client} frame-part attribute

@item Fixed the disappearing items in the match-windows dialog

@item Fixed the non-beautified entries in the keymaps dialog

@item Fixed interactive placement mode (Timo Korvola)

@item Invoke audio playing program asynchronously, may avoid deadlocks

@item Fixed @code{workspace-menu} to add the focus-marking asterisk
(John N S Gill)

@item Fixed menu-obscuring bug after auto-raising windows

@item Ensure that @code{WM_STATE} property is set each time a window is
mapped, not just the first time

@item Fixed bug when discarding grab in click-to-focus mode, even
though successive events may be in the window's keymap

@item Only focus windows when they're mapped when they're visible

@item Fixed click-to-focus problems when unmapping transient windows

@end itemize


@heading 0.26

@itemize @bullet

@item Added plugin @code{selection}, adds functions
@code{x-selection-active-p} and @code{x-get-selection} for retrieving X
selections (Mark Probst)

@item New functions @code{prompt-for-window},
@code{prompt-for-workspace} and @code{select-workspace-interactively}
(Dave Pearson)

@item @code{window-anim} module enabling asynchronous animations after
window events. Currently only two animation styles @code{wireframe} and
@code{solid}, and they only animate window iconification

@item @code{audio-events} module; maps window manager events to audio
samples (played using esd by default, but can be configured to use any
program)

@item When running programs in terminals from the GNOME apps menu, use
the value of @code{xterm-program} to decide which terminal program to
use (James Antill)

@item Translation updates: gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez), pl (Daniel Koc)

@item New command @code{toggle-window-iconified} (Jens-Ulrik Petersen)

@item New option @code{raise-windows-when-unshaded}

@item Customization options for tooltip colors (Erik Assum)

@item Removed default binding to @kbd{A-x}

@item Added support for librep-with-module-system (cvs version)

@item Note that @samp{ko} and @samp{zh} languages need FontSets

@item When sticking a window not on the current viewport, move it to
the current viewport (Merlin)

@item Fixed bug (?) of placing over avoided windows in @code{random}
mode; also increased @code{sp-avoided-windows-weight} by an order of
magnitude (Dan Winship)

@item Fixed bug of maximizing a window changing its viewport

@item Fixed window cycling losing grab if originally focused window is
unmapped

@item Fixed @code{get-cursor} to use the correct background color when
creating cursors from vectors (Alexander Barinov)

@item Fixed @code{get-font} to set `descent' property correctly

@item Changed double-buffering semantics in @code{x} plugin, also only
support this if configure finds the correct header files

@item Fixed @code{synthesize-event} to generate correct relative
pointer positions

@item Don't focus on non-visible windows (crashes GNOME control center)

@item Fixed bug of using @file{cp} to install GNOME desktop files

@end itemize


@heading 0.25.2

@itemize @bullet

@item If no user customization file when saving options, inherit from
the custom-defaults file

@item Rewrote window stacking (fixes bugs, more efficient)

@item Added @code{input-focus} to theme-callable functions

@item When focused window is unmapped, don't try to focus non-visible
windows

@item Fixed @code{display-window} when it's applied to iconified
windows

@item New variables @code{fonts-are-fontsets} and
@code{fontset-languages-re} to work around broken X servers

@item Update edges for snapping to when dragging windows across
workspaces or viewports

@item When passing keymaps to customization system, filter out, then
later restore, bindings that aren't symbols

@item Most commands to move/copy windows between workspaces can now be
told whether to select the destination workspace or not

@item In GNOME hints, never place windows on workspaces that don't
exist (from the pager's POV). (Rob Hodges)

@item Fixed @code{ws-move-window} to not remove the window if source
and dest are the same (Rob Hodges)

@item Fixed @code{sp-prune-points} function (Dan Winship)

@item Fixed @code{move-viewport-to-window} to only flip viewports if
window isn't already on the current viewport (Merlin)

@item Try to detect and handle system clock being rewound

@item Optional second arg to @code{x-raise-window}; added symmetrical
function @code{x-lower-window}

@item Fixed unix-domain server code assuming atomic writes to sockets

@item Added double buffering support to @code{x} module

@item Fixed grabs during multi-key sequences; also, print the current
prefix keys if idle during a multi-key sequence

@end itemize


@heading 0.25.1

@itemize @bullet

@item Only force windows onto the visible screen if they didn't
explicitly set their position

@item Redefine @code{/} in themes to be the @code{quotient} function
(integer division), which is what they expect. The @code{divide}
function can be used for real division
@end itemize


@heading 0.25

@itemize @bullet

@item New plugin @code{x}, a basic Xlib binding for creating and
drawing in windows (Merlin, me)

@item Added a method of reading textual input from the user from
completion. Provision for completing functions, variables, commands,
files, directories, etc@dots{}. Also supports reading passwords. (Topi
Paavola, me)

@item Re-enabled the following interactive codes: @samp{a} (function),
@samp{C} (command), @samp{D} (directory), @samp{f} (existing file),
@samp{F} (file), @samp{k} (event), @samp{n} (number), @samp{N} (prefix
or number), @samp{s} (string), @samp{S} (symbol), @samp{v} (variable)

@item Support prefix keys in bindings (binding an event to a keymap, or
the name of a keymap, marks that event as a prefix key for the
associated keymap)

@item New command @code{call-command-with-output-to-screen}, prompts
for and invokes a command, then displays any output it emitted (bound
to @kbd{A-x} in default keymaps)

@item New variable @code{multi-click-delay}, maximum time in
milliseconds between button presses to count as @kbd{click2} or
@kbd{click3} events (Martin Blais)

@item New option @code{edge-flip-only-when-moving} (Yaron M. Minsky)

@item New window cycling commands @code{cycle-prefix},
@code{cycle-class} (Kai Großjohann); can now be bound to events with
more than one modifier (Timo Korvola)

@item New command @code{uniquify-window-name}; new property
@code{unique-name}. Forces the window to have a unique name

@item New commands @code{size-window-add-column},
@code{size-window-subtract-column}, @code{size-window-add-row},
@code{size-window-subtract-row}

@item Window edge snapping now has three variants: @code{magnetism}
(the old method), @code{attraction} and @code{resistance}. (Merlin, me)

@item New commands @code{grow-window-@{left,right,up,down@}} and
@code{pack-window-@{left,right,up,down@}} (Kai Großjohann)

@item Support the @code{WM_COLORMAP_WINDOWS} protocol

@item New functions @code{synthesize-event}, @code{font-ascent},
@code{font-descent}, @code{call-with-keyboard-grabbed}

@item New functions @code{define-placement-mode} and
@code{define-focus-mode}---make defining these things easier. Focus
modes are now settable for each window individually

@item Made the tree-organised customization groups work better with the
GNOME control center. Add the sawmill capplet desktop entries to the
GNOME programs menu (under Settings). Also, beautify the names
displayed in the bindings widget

@item When applicable, load the GNOME applications menu when the wm is
first idle, reduces the latency of displaying the first root menu

@item Translation updates: de (Hubert Nachbaur), es (Iñaki García
Etxebarria), ja (Sato Satoru), sv (Andreas Persenius)

@item Fix bug of not noticing when the keyboard / pointer / modifier
mappings change

@item Fixed @code{current-event-string} function

@item Better method of reconfiguring frames when they're resized (helps
opaque resizing)

@item Added some kludges to try and break the intermittent lockups some
people have seen

@item Made the auto-gravity option work a lot better (John N S Gill,
me)

@item Fixed bug where unmapped windows were being included in the
snapping calculation

@item Fixed bug when uniconifying windows and merging workspaces

@item Fixed bug of warp-cursor-to-window trying to put the pointer
outside the screen boundaries (Merlin)

@item Fixed bug of losing keyboard grab when originally focused window
is deleted during @code{x-cycle} command

@item Fixed bug of trying to focus unviewable parent windows when
focused window is unmapped

@end itemize


@heading 0.24

@itemize @bullet

@item Configure requests events are now passed to the hook
@code{configure-request-hook}. The new configure handler respects
window gravity when resizing

@item New option @code{configure-auto-gravity}. When enabled the window
gravity is implied by the position of the center of the window. (e.g.
try placing the GNOME control center in the bottom right corner of the
screen, then click on an item that causes it to resize)

@item Worked around the numerous reports of non-existent font errors
that using @code{XCreateFontSet} causes---fall back to
@code{XLoadQueryFont} if possible

@item There's now a library @file{custom-defaults} giving default
customization options (only if the user has no
@file{~/.sawmill/custom})

Also, remove the need to call @code{custom-add-required} in
@file{.sawmillrc}, it's always done now

@item New window properties @code{focus-when-mapped}, and
@code{gravity} (overrides the hinted gravity value)

@item New placement modes @code{under-pointer} and
@code{centered-on-parent}

@item New option @code{resize-edge-mode}, replaces
@code{resize-by-frame-class} and @code{resize-add-edges}>. Also allows
twm-style resizing (Mark Probst, me)

@item Optionally display command documentation in tooltips; tooltips
are now aligned into columns (if you use a monospaced font for them)

@item Variables @code{default-cursor},
@code{synthetic-configure-mutex}, @code{frame-draw-mutex},
@code{frame-state-mutex} are now functions

@item New functions @code{x-keysym-name}, @code{x-lookup-keysym},
@code{decode-event}, @code{encode-event}.

@item New option @code{move-resize-inhibit-configure}

@item Translation updates: es (Iñaki García Etxebarria), fr (Christian
Gillot), gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez), nl (Han-Wen Nienhuys), pt_PT (Rui
Silva), sv (Andreas Persenius)

@item Fixed single-quoting in client readline (Matt Krai), copied
bouncing parentheses hack

@item Removed @code{fp->win == 0} assertion, it should be harmless and
was triggering for some people

@item Fixed bug of sending configure notify events to too many windows

@item Fixed off-by-one error in @code{ws-insert-workspace} (Kirk
Saranathan)

@item Fixed maximization in single directions to work additively

@item Fixed bug of leaving tooltips displayed after the associated
window has been deleted

@item Fixed bug of not removing @samp{-clientId} option from restart
parameters

@item Fixed bug of not translating customize group names

@end itemize


@heading 0.23

@itemize @bullet

@item Customization groups are now organized as a tree structure, with
groups able to contain subgroups

@item Define the list of features that will be presented to the user in
@file{sawmill-defaults.jl}, by calling @code{custom-add-required}. If
you have a @file{.sawmillrc} you'll need to do this manually

@item New function @code{move-resize-window-to} doing a combined
move/resize. New variable @code{synthetic-configure-mutex}, when set
holds off sending synthetic @code{ConfigureNotify} events to windows
until it's unset (this is held while interactively moving or resizing
windows)

@item New hook @code{after-add-window-hook}. Called with a single
parameter, the window that's has just been adopted

@item New functions @code{x-kill-client}, @code{delete-window-safely}.
@code{send-client-message} now groks long integers (i.e. cons cells) in
32-bit data (Timo Korvola)

@item @code{window-put}, @code{window-get}, @code{image-put},
@code{image-get}, @code{font-put}, @code{font-get}: use @code{equal} to
compare keys, not @code{eq}

@item New module @code{error-handler}, implements a simple alternative
error handler (and allows the much-maligned beep to be turned off),
requires rep 0.11+

@item Allow the pointer-warp position to be defined relative to the
window (Kai Großjohann)

@item New module @code{shade-hover}, unshades windows while the pointer
is over them

@item Don't automatically warp to the new workspace when opening
windows on a different workspace

@item Include iconified sticky windows in the @code{window-menu},
shorten sticky entries as usual (James Antill)

@item Support the @samp{TryExec} field in GNOME desktop files (Ian)

@item New commands: @code{raise-or-pass-through-click},
@code{raise-and-pass-through-click-if-focused}

@item New module @code{move-cursor}, various commands for moving the
mouse pointer; these commands are bound to the cursor keys when moving
or resizing windows

@item Translation updates: es (Iñaki García Etxebarria), fr (Fabien
Ninoles), gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez), ja (Satoru Sato), nl (Jan
Nieuwenhuizen), tr (Fâtih Demir)

@item Fix bug of leaving window-name unset when @code{WM_NAME} is a
null text property

@item Don't fail catastrophically if unable to open the default font

@item Fixed method of truncating maximized window dimensions

@item Fixed the match-window @code{skip-winlist} and
@code{skip-tasklist} properties I'd stupidly broken

@item Fixed bug of trying to edge-flip sticky windows

@item Fixed the @code{move-workspace-forwards} and
@code{move-workspace-backwards} commands

@item Fixed @code{uniconify-to-current-viewport} option

@item Fixed infinite-loop bug in @code{delete-empty-workspaces} command

@item Avoid generating empty sub-menus when reading GNOME menu tree

@end itemize


@heading 0.22

@itemize @bullet

@item Window frame parts are now first-class lisp data objects,
allowing a higher level of control by themes

New or updated functions to access frame parts directly:

@noindent @code{frame-part-get}, @code{frame-part-put},
@code{frame-part-window}, @code{frame-part-x-window},
@code{frame-part-position}, @code{frame-part-dimensions},
@code{frame-part-state}, @code{map-frame-parts},
@code{refresh-frame-part}, @code{rebuild-frame-part}

Other new functions: @code{refresh-window}

@item Updated @code{sawmill-themer} to emit code to tell the window
manager that the theme is editable. The wm adds an @samp{Edit Theme...}
option to the Customize menu when appropriate

@item The @code{call-after-property-changed} function can now be given
a list of properties to monitor (James Antill)

@item New function @code{call-after-state-changed}, monitors a list of
window states (i.e. things like iconified, shaded, @dots{}) and calls a
function when any of them change. The @code{window-state-change-hook}
now has a second argument (apart from the window), the list of symbolic
states that changed (James Antill)

@item Add support for @code{skip-winlist} and @code{skip-tasklist} to
the window matcher when GNOME support is enabled (Ben Liblit)

@item Integrated patch supporting multi-byte languages from the Kondara
MNU/Linux distribution (forwarded by Yukihiro Nakai)

@item Translation updates: de (Christoph Rauch), es (Iñaki García
Etxebarria), gl (Jesus Bravo Alvarez), ja (Satoru Sato), tr (Fâtih
Demir)

@item Use a combo box in the configurator to display the list of
themes (it gets given scroll bars when too big for the screen)

@item Changed timestamp handling---attempt to detect and discard
timestamps that arrive out of order

@item Added option controlling title justification to @code{mono} theme

@item Filter @key{Scroll_Lock} modifiers as well as the other lock
modifiers (Matt Krai)

@item Fixed @code{display-message} function update background color,
and gracefully handle invalid color specifiers (Matt Krai)

@item Reverted to grabbing events on the client window, not the frame,
avoids some awkward-to-fix-correctly problems

@item Load i18n support @emph{before} other libraries; ensures that
some static strings get translated

@item Fixed annoying flicker when cycling to an iconified window

@end itemize


@heading 0.21.1

@itemize @bullet

@item Fixed problem causing spurious double-click events to be reported
in click-to-focus mode

@item Fixed problem with binding @kbd{-Off} events in the
@code{window-keymap}. (Matt Krai)

@item Don't try to grab non-existent keys (which actually grabs the
entire keyboard)

@item Fixed some problems with reading unusually formatted GNOME menu
entries

@end itemize


@heading 0.21

@itemize @bullet

@item Frame pattern definitions (foreground, background, font) may now
take alists as well as the old single object, or list of four objects.
Possible states are @code{inactive}, @code{focused},
@code{highlighted}, @code{clicked}, @code{inactive-highlighted},
@code{inactive-clicked}. (Last two are new)

@item New program @code{sawmill-themer}. A GUI for creating simple
themes (those without any parts defined by functions)

@item New module @code{gnome-int}, loaded by @code{sawmill-defaults} if
GNOME is around, sets up some GNOME'ish things

@item New command @code{toggle-single-window-mode}

@item Translation updates/additions: de (Christoph Rauch), es (Iñaki
García Etxebarria), nl (Han-Wen Nienhuys)

@item Optional removal of tooltips after time period (Morgan Schweers)

@item @kbd{Any-RET} completes interactive move or resize

@item Work around Imlib's annoying image caching, @code{make-image} now
@emph{always} returns a new image

@item Fixed gc bug when building window frames

@item Fixed X property handling on Alpha's (George Lebl)

@item Make @code{call-command} accept closures

@item Make @code{(cursor . nil)} work correctly in frame definitions

@item Grab on frame window, not client window (ICCCM compliant)

@item Fixed the ``uniconify to current workspace'' option

@item Added window-maximization predicates to the gaol

@end itemize


@heading 0.20

@itemize @bullet

@item Rewrote workspace handling---windows can now appear on multiple
workspaces, with each instance having different properties (position,
size, whatever@dots{})

Create new window instances by using the @code{copy-to-next-workspace},
@code{copy-to-previous-workspace}, and @code{copy-to-workspace:@var{n}}
commands. Merge instances by moving them to the same workspace, or
using the @code{delete-window-instance} command

@item Added linear-viewport commands---indexing two-dimensional virtual
workspace areas by one-dimensional values (adapted from code by Eric
Kidd)

@item Rewrote tooltips; especially how they're removed (also, don't
show null keymaps)

@item Added new match-window property @code{ungrouped}. Means to put
the window in a group on its own

@item Translation additions/updates: da (Wandy Christiansen), en_GB
(me), es (Iñaki García Etxebarria), fr (Christian Gillot), gl (Jesus
Bravo Alvarez)

@item Fixed bug of not refocusing unshaded windows

@item Fixed bug of not notifying windows of their actual position after
placing them

@item Fixed bug when grabbing Hyper-modified buttons

@item Fixed the focus-flickering when moving windows opaquely

@item Fixed the @code{commandp} function when applied to autoload stubs

@item Fixed typo in @code{gnome-logout} command (Jens Finke)

@item Fixed @code{raise-window-and-pass-through-click} command to pass
@key{click2}, etc, events through to frame parts

@item Fixed infinite-regress bug when reading GNOME menu entries
(@samp{Type=directory}, but actually a file)

@item Fixed bug when showing window-move position with snapped movement
(adapted from merlin@@merlin.org)

@item Fixed bug when matching null text properties

@end itemize


@heading 0.19

@itemize @bullet

@item Added tooltips for window frames (disabled by default)

@item Added @samp{Grab@dots{}} button to match-windows dialogue, grabs
the value of an X property from a window

@item Support for creating cursors from bitmaps, and for changing the
colors of cursors

@item Internationalized all strings in the configurator

@item New functions: @code{frame-part-get}, @code{server-grabbed-p},
@code{forget-button-press}, @code{resize-window-with-hints},
@code{window-in-workspace-p}, @code{windows-share-workspace-p}

@item New window properties: @code{never-focus}, @code{raise-on-focus}

@item New pseudo-property (for window matching): @code{size}, in terms
of the window's size hints

@item Message catalogue additions/updates: Galician (Jesus Bravo
Alvarez); Danish (Birger Langkjer)

@item Don't ignore initial state property of windows

@item Option to control height of drawn bevels (Chris Hanson)

@item More logical method of drawing diagonal gradients (Chris Hanson)

@item Fixed typo when looking for i18n theme README files (Jesus Bravo
Alvarez)

@item Fixed @code{popup-apps-menu} command (Gérard Milmeister)

@item Fixed @code{define-frame-class} when creating keymaps

@item Fixed conversion of old-style @code{(set @dots{})} custom types

@item Fixed @code{raise-window-and-pass-through-click} command to
pass-through subsequent clicks

@item Fixed problems when grabbing/ungrabbing customized keymaps

@item Fixed screen corruption when doing wireframe moving and
@code{move-resize-raise-window} is set

@item Hacked around window-order problem when sticky windows exist

@end itemize


@heading 0.18

@itemize @bullet

@item General subsystem for matching windows to properties as they're
created. Allows matching on one or more of the window's X properties
(e.g. name, class, etc@dots{}), and then setting any number of window
manager properties as a result. See the @samp{Matched Windows}
customize group

@item Removed all @code{auto-@var{foo}-alist} and
@code{@var{bar}-windows-re} variables, they're obsoleted by the general
match-windows mechanism

@item Respect window's size hints when maximizing (both to see if the
window is maximizable, and to truncate the maximized dimensions to an
integral number of rows and columns)

@item Show actual colors in the configurator, not just their names

@item Added a new directory to the theme search path:
@file{@var{prefix}/share/sawmill/themes}. Use this for system-wide
themes (don't use the version specific directory)

@item Included a new theme @code{mono}

@item Deprecated the @code{show-message} function, replaced by
@code{display-message} with a better calling interface; also displays
multi-line strings

@item Deprecated the menu ``expand variables when first in list''
behaviour. Instead expand variables when the list is dotted to them, as
is done for functions

@item Support the @code{Hyper} modifier, prefix is @kbd{H-}

@item In the configurator, look for i18n'd theme README files (Yukihiro
Nakai)

@item Added option to disable the ability to grab a second edge while
resizing (@code{resize-add-edges})

@item Included Danish message catalogue (Kenneth Christiansen)

@item Renamed @code{fixed-position} property as @code{sticky-viewport},
and @code{focus-proxy-click} as @code{focus-click-through}

@item When evaluating mouse events, look in the window that the pointer
was in when the button was pressed, not where the pointer currently is

@item Fixed bug where focus gets totally lost after closing a Motif
application that has grabbed the keyboard

@item Fixed (again) the problems when handling remapped windows; also
should be more ICCCM-compliant

@item Fixed typos in one-dimensional maximisation (Gérard Milmeister)

@item Fixed the logic deciding when it's necessary to switch workspaces
after merging an empty one

@item Fixed interactive placement showing the window when edge-flipping
(but it still doesn't work properly, rubber band traces are left)

@item Removed flicker when focusing already-focused windows

@end itemize


@heading 0.17

@itemize @bullet

@item First version to use lexically scoped librep. This enables themes
to run in a ``safe'' environment, but all existing themes will need to
be ported; other language changes include the use of a single symbol
namespace, and scheme-like function call semantics

@item Support for internationalization of messages and run-time
documentation; an en_GB catalogue is the only translation currently, so
please send me .po files for your native languages!

New option @samp{--disable-nls} to disable i18n

@item New functions @code{call-after-property-changed} and
@code{gtkrc-call-after-changed} to allow themes to receive these events
(hooks are now off-limits to themes)

@item New command @code{raise-window-and-pass-through-click}; bind it
to a mouse button in the @code{window-keymap} to get the ``raise window
on click'' behaviour that seems popular

@item New commands to move windows incrementally:
@code{slide-window-@var{x}} and @code{slide-group-@var{x}} for @var{x}
one of: @code{left}, @code{right}, @code{up}, @code{down}

@item New commands to control @code{ignored} property of windows
(Julian Missig)

@item New commands to toggle GNOME skip-winlist and skip-tasklist
properties of windows

@item Respect window gravity with program-specified window placement
(@email{merlin@@merlin.org})

@item Fixed a memory leak in the @code{stacking-order} function

@item Fixed the @code{bevel-image} function (Scott Sams)

@item Never look in the focused window's keymap by default with mouse
events

@item Hacked around the ``need an X11 connection to compile'' misfeature

@item Fixed bug in @code{gnome-menu} code when GNOME binaries aren't in
the first $PATH item; also accept non-alphanumeric language codes

@item Fixed interactive window placement (again)

@item Rewrote obscure documentation for some custom options

@item Fixed bug when grabbing events with @code{AnyModifier} and a
specific button

@end itemize


@heading 0.16

@itemize @bullet

@item Support window groups, both as defined by applications, and
defined by the user (either interactively through the window's menu, or
via the @code{auto-group-alist} and @code{persistent-group-ids}
variables).

For most commands working on single windows, there's also one operating
on the group that the current window is a member of. (With the notable
exception currently of moving windows.) There's also options
controlling whether (de)iconification operates on windows or groups

@item Improved GNOME menu support---merge duplicate sub-menus, scan
PATH for @code{gnome-share-directory}, also look in
@file{/etc/X11/applnk} for menu entries

@item Option to control whether edge-flipping flips viewports or
workspaces (@code{edge-flip-type})

@item New hook @code{after-framing-hook}: called whenever a window's
frame is changed or recalibrated

@item New window placement mode: @code{first-fit-or-interactive}

@item Variables specifying common cursor shapes:
(@code{move-cursor-shape}, @code{resize-cursor-shape},
@code{select-window-cursor-shape})

@item Fix interactive placement

@item Fix problem of window losing focus when @code{cycle-windows} only
finds a single window; also, abort immediately if there's no windows to
cycle through at all

@item Fix how the @code{WM_NORMAL_HINTS} property is read after it's
been updated

@item Fix @code{maximize-fill} functions to respect the
@code{maximize-ignore-when-filling} option

@item Fix interactive move/resize aborting if keyboard is already
grabbed

@item Ungrab the keyboard as well as the pointer before popping menus

@end itemize


@heading 0.15

@itemize @bullet

@item Changed how themes are loaded from tar files---the tar file must
now contain a directory with the same name as the theme; it's this
directory that stores the data files

@item Allow viewport edge-flipping to be enabled by the customization
system, also enable flipping while moving windows

@item Unified the method of marking which windows should be avoided
when maximizing, and which windows should be avoided when using the
fitted placement methods. Set the @code{avoid} property instead of the
@code{maximize-avoid} property; new functions @code{window-avoided-p}
and @code{avoided-windows}; new regexp @code{avoided-windows-re}

@item New command @code{delete-empty-workspaces}

@item Default theme is now @code{microGUI}

@item When resizing only one edge of a window, moving the pointer past
one of the perpendicular edges grabs that edge also

@item Only the first three buttons focus a window in click-to-focus
mode

@item Changed behaviour of @code{window-id} and
@code{window-frame-dimensions} functions. Replaced
@code{query-last-pointer} function by @code{query-button-press-pointer}

@item New hooks: @code{while-moving-hook}, @code{while-resizing-hook}

@item Notice when @code{WM_TRANSIENT_FOR} property changes

@item More bug fixes to the maximization code, mainly for efficiency;
also make first-fit placement work from top-left again

@item Fix bug when matching events with @kbd{Any} modifier as well as
other modifiers

@item Fix bug in @code{window-outside-viewport-p} (Andreas Degert)

@item Fix bug in @samp{sawmill-client --} with long inputs

@item Fix bug when matching windows with session
data---@code{SM_CLIENT_ID} or @code{WM_COMMAND} @emph{has} to match

@item Fix bugs when passive grabbing non-button-press pointer events

@end itemize


@heading 0.14

@itemize @bullet

@item Rewrote window-maximization, many new options

@item New option @code{resize-by-frame-class}, when enabled (the
default), the resized window edges are chosen to match the class of the
clicked frame part (i.e. matching the cursor shape)

@item Load GNOME support code automatically if it looks like GNOME is
being used

@item Create unix-domain sockets in @file{/tmp}

@item New hooks: @code{window-moved-hook}, @code{window-resized-hook},
@code{after-initialization-hook}, @code{shape-notify-hook}.

@item Improved how menus are displayed; the window-ops menu is shown by
ButtonPress not ButtonRelease events

@item Refocus most-recently-focused window when switching viewport

@item Added @code{centered} placement style

@item Added symbol-completion to readline-based client

@item Fix bug of not noticing WM_NORMAL_HINTS property changes; follow
the window's maximum size hints

@item Fix bug of not reframing windows when they change from unshaped
to shaped, or vice versa

@end itemize


@heading 0.13

@itemize @bullet

@item New option to only highlight frame parts when their window is
focused (@code{highlight-when-unfocused})

@item Typing @kbd{ESC} while moving/resizing a window cancels the
operation, restoring the original geometry

@item New session management hook @code{sm-after-restore-hook}

@item New function @code{set-frame-part-value}---makes customizing the
@code{frame-part-classes} variables easier

@item Support for loading themes from tar files; needs librep 0.7

@item Fix bug when allocating colors (choosing an incorrect cached
color)

@item Fix image tiling in frame part backgrounds

@item Handle shifted keysyms when passive grabbing

@item Fix another race condition when active grabbing

@item Fix @code{_WIN_CLIENT_LIST} property not being set properly (both
missing windows immediately after they're adopted, and of intentionally
skipping ignored windows)

@item Fix some problems with viewports when exiting/restarting

@item Fix broken stacking of windows after they're mapped

@item Prevent smart window placement blowing up when large numbers of
windows are open/opened (throttle back to random placement when the
event queue is too large, as well as trying to prune the search space)

@end itemize


@heading 0.12

@itemize @bullet

@item Remember most recently focused windows on each workspace,
activate that window after changing workspaces; also, try to preserve
focus when moving windows between workspaces

@item Option to disable auto-raise while cycling through windows
(@code{cycle-disable-auto-raise}); option to restrict cycling to the
current viewport (@code{cycle-all-viewports})

@item Option @code{lock-first-workspace} is now enabled by default, and
prevents both the first and last interesting workspaces being moved
inwards

@item Added readline support to the client program, pass
@samp{--with-readline} option to configure (from Christopher P Goller
@email{goller@@eng.utah.edu})

@item Added shaped-transient frame to microGUI theme

@item New frame part attribute @code{below-client}

@item Release passive grabs when unadopting windows

@item When no window has the focus, the @code{root-window-keymap} is
searched for key-press events

@item Fix bug when binding to the unix-domain socket

@item Fix focus sometimes being lost when the focused window is
destroyed

@item Fix bug when reading GNOME menu entries without @samp{Type}
fields

@item Fix bug when removing title or border of @code{shaped-transient}
window types (make the window completely unframed)

@item Fix bug when shading a transient window with
@code{decorate-transients} enabled

@item Fix some bugs when placing windows that are almost as big or
bigger than the screen

@item Fix some race-conditions between wm-generated and
client-generated map/unmap/reparent events

@item Fix infamous ``jerky pointer'' bug, this will also make
overlapping shaped frame-parts display correctly

@item Fix bug where @code{cycle-windows} could leave a window
originally under the pointer that's unfocused, drawn as though it is
focused

@end itemize


@heading 0.11

@itemize @bullet

@item New option @code{lock-first-workspace}, prevent the first
workspace from being deleted when it's empty

@item New option @code{ignore-window-input-hint}, to always give
windows the focus, whether they say they will accept it or not

@item New options when cycling windows: @code{cycle-warp-pointer} and
@code{cycle-focus-windows}

@item Restore the old method of setting the focus, should fix bug of
losing focus totally when switching to a new workspace

@end itemize


@heading 0.10

@itemize @bullet

@item Implemented virtual workspaces, bind to the
@code{move-viewport-@var{x}} and @code{move-window-@var{x}} commands
(for @var{x} being @code{left}, @code{right}, @code{up}, or
@code{down})

@item Added a new theme: @code{microGUI} by Ryan Lovett
@email{ryan@@ocf.berkeley.edu}, based on the QNX Photon screenshots

@item Added a @samp{Grab key} button in the bindings widget, replaces
the current binding with the next pressed key

@item Lisp module to load the GNOME menus and use them to replace the
applications menu. Add @code{(require 'gnome-menu)} to your
@file{~/.sawmillrc} file to load it

@item Network server is disabled by default (since it can provide a
security hole if X access control is disabled); re-enabled the old unix
domain socket code (see the FAQ for more details)

@item Only give the input focus to windows that actually want it

@item New option to keep transient windows above their parents
(@code{transients-above-parents})

@item New option to control how the workspace boundary is handled when
moving windows between workspaces (@code{workspace-send-boundary-mode})

@item New commands @code{send-to-workspace:@var{x}} for @var{x} from 1
to 9

@item While windows are hidden or shaded, unmap the client (for ICCCM
compliance)

@item Slightly different method of handling destroyed clients,
hopefully results in fewer annoying error messages

@item Support X installations without X11R6 session management (by not
doing any session management)

@item Don't ask the session manager to save our environment

@item Fix bug where a window is destroyed/unmapped while it's being
resized or moved

@item Fix bug where window can still be auto-raised even if it's been
defocused

@item Fix problems when @samp{--prefix} option has a trailing slash

@item Now handles client windows being reparented by a third party
(i.e. swallowing apps)

@end itemize


@heading 0.9

@itemize @bullet

@item The first-fit and best-fit algorithms are now much more
intelligent, e.g. instead of falling back to random placement when a
window can't be placed without overlapping an existing window, they
will attempt to minimize this degree of overlapping

@item The @code{foreground} property of each frame part may now be an
image instead of a piece of text

@item New theme @code{smaker}, uses the foreground images capability to
do a somewhat WindowMaker-like theme (with the absolute-e images). This
theme is extensively customizable---all images, colors, dimensions,
etc@dots{}

@item Use Imlib's fuzzy color matching for all color allocation; this
should help on @code{PseudoColor} visuals

@item Added an @code{xterm} command to launch an xterm

@item Improved the bindings customization widget layout; added a
@samp{Copy} button to insert a copy of the current binding

@item Added @code{next-workspace-row} and @code{previous-workspace-row}
commands. Together with the @code{workspace-columns} variable these
mimic a 2d desktop

@item Removed the @code{cycle-through-workspaces} option, there's now
@code{workspace-boundary-mode}---one of @code{stop}, @code{wrap-around}
or @code{keep-going}

@item Added option to include ignored windows when edge snapping
(@code{move-snap-ignored-windows})

@item Fix race condition between startup of sawmill and gmc; sawmill
now has earlier priority

@item Fix seg fault when running out of color cells while generating a
window frame

@item Fix bug where the window-workspace mapping wasn't reloaded from
saved sessions

@item Fix cancel/revert problems in bindings widget

@item Fix problems binding to shifted keys when using the XKEYBOARD
extension and XFree86

@item Be ICCCM compliant when a client requests to be moved

@item Fix crash when tiling small images into large images

@item Fix bug where windows could be snapped totally off-screen

@item Fix bug when windows change their @code{override_redirect}
attribute while unmapped

@item Fix bug associated with WordPerfect's menu window

@end itemize


@heading 0.8

@itemize @bullet

@item First attempt at best-fit window placement (doesn't really work
properly yet@dots{})

@item Added a customization option to focus windows when they're
un-iconified (@code{focus-windows-on-uniconify})

@item Fix bug in click-to-focus mode where the click is only passed
through to the client window, not to any local bindings of the wm

@item Don't leave windows unframed if there's an error in the user's
startup files

@item Fix bug in @code{preallocated-workspaces} option

@item Don't place windows off-screen in first-fit mode

@end itemize


@heading 0.7

@itemize @bullet

@item Added stack-based window cycling, bound to @kbd{M-TAB} by
default. Hold @key{Meta}, keep pressing @key{TAB} until the correct
window is reached, then let go of @key{Meta}.

@item Added first-fit window placement (a.k.a smart-placement)

@item Completed first stage of workspace rewrite---shouldn't go
ballistic when windows are removed anymore

@item Added @code{override-frame-part-classes} variable---allows all
frame properties to be overridden on a per-class basis

@item Click-to-focus now accepts any button and any modifiers

@item Don't snap to gmc icons or panels

@item Added an @code{auto-window-type-alist} variable mapping window
names to border types

@item New variables @code{eval-modifier-events} and
@code{eval-key-release-events} to allow catching these types of
keyboard events, disabled by default

@item Added functions for actively grabbing the keyboard

@item Removed the long names of the keyboard modifiers, only the single
character modifiers are left

@item If no alt modifier, set it to the same as meta; new variables
@code{alt-keysyms} and @code{meta-keysyms} describe the virtual
modifier assignments

@item Fix bug when handling shaped frame parts---it was possible to go
into a long enter-, leave-notify loop when the old shape was cleared

@item Fix bug where opaque resizing with snap-to-edges on moved the
window as well as resizing it

@item Fix bug when raising the only managed window

@item Fix bug where very small client windows got weirdly shaped
frames

@end itemize


@heading 0.6

@itemize @bullet

@item Define the standard @dfn{classes} of frame parts (i.e. things
like close button, title, left border, etc...) then allow the state of
members of these classes to be set in one place (the
@code{frame-part-classes} variable). This should ensure that different
themes have the same feel (but a feel that may be customized by the
user)

@item Allow frame parts to be removed if possible (if they have the
@code{removable} property). Nothing makes use of this yet

@item Added window-shading, double-click button1 on the title bar

@item Created a sawmill capplet for the GNOME control center. Use the
@samp{--enable-capplet} configure option to build it

@item First attempt at a technical manual (very quickly written, so
probably some inaccuracies)

@item In the @code{gtk} theme, draw bevels on window decorations

@item Use spin-buttons in the configurator to enter numbers

@item Add option @code{focus-proxy-click} controlling whether to pass
the focus-inducing button-press event to the underlying window (in
click-to-focus mode)

@item Changed the bindings in window borders, it's now the more usual
button1 to resize, button2 to move

@item When clicking and dragging windows, ensure that the clicked frame
part stays clicked until the button is released

@item If in click-to-focus mode, and there's no parent window to focus
when the focused window is closed, focus the topmost window (not the
window under the pointer as in the other focus modes)

@item Changing window frames is @emph{much} less ugly, no flicker at
all!

@item Try to optimise window restacking some more

@item Sped up opaque window moving when the position display is enabled

@item Preserve iconified state across restarts

@item Optimise updating the shape of an unframed window (this stops gmc
icons flashing annoyingly)

@item Fix bugs in click-to-focus mode where some windows were
un-focusable

@item Fix bug where cycling through windows in click-to-focus mode
didn't focus the activated window

@item Fix bug where comparing sawmill lisp objects caused a crash

@item Fix bug where initiating a resize in the middle of the window
didn't allow any of the edges to be moved

@item Fix bug where changing the ``decorate transients'' option didn't
alter any existing transient windows

@item Fix bug where iconifying a sticky or ignored window gave no way
of reclaiming it---these windows now appear at the end of the window
menu

@end itemize


@heading 0.5

@itemize @bullet

@item Now does session management. The scheme is extensible, arbitrary
Lisp modules can save and restore window state due to their own
functionality (using the @code{sm-window-save-functions} and
@code{sm-restore-window-hook} hooks). See @file{lisp/workspace.jl} for
an example

@item Displays window position or dimensions whilst interactively
moving or resizing a window (@code{move-show-position},
@code{resize-show-dimensions})

@item Mechanism for setting frame styles on a per-window basis (this
was always possible, just not easy). The @code{auto-frame-style-alist}
variable associates window name regular expressions with frame styles.
Also, the @code{window-ops-menu} has a new submenu with all possible
styles

@item New option @code{preallocated-workspaces}, the number of
workspaces to create at startup

@item Window-workspace mapping is preserved through restart (as long as
the GNOME hints are enabled)

@item Theme directories may contain a short @file{README} file that
will be displayed in the configuration tool

@item Changed the custom file to @file{~/.sawmill/custom} instead of
@file{~/.sawmill-custom}. The old file will be moved to the new
location if it exists

@item Install @file{sawmill-menu} under @file{libexec} since it
shouldn't be run manually

@item Option in @code{gradient} theme to create full-sized gradient
images, trading memory for quality

@item Workaround the flicker when raising windows

@item Changed most of the @code{menus} and @code{custom} customize
options into normal variables (they're not particularly intuitive)

@end itemize


@heading 0.4

@itemize @bullet

@item Frame parts can now be highlighted when the mouse is over them,
also they ``un-click'' and ``re-click'' as the pointer leaves and
re-enters their window. ButtonRelease bindings are only activated when
the mouse is in the window at the time

@item Frame part backgrounds can now be rendered on-the-fly using the
new @code{renderer} property in frame definitions. This property is a
function called with args @code{(@var{image} @var{state})}; it should
draw a background into @var{image} for the specified state (@code{nil},
@code{focused}, @code{highlighted} or @code{clicked})

@item New theme @code{gtk}. This reads the default GTK style and uses
the associated colors and pixmaps to decorate windows. It doesn't try
to handle engine-based themes. It should automatically detect when the
default style changes (if changed by the GNOME control center). Do
@samp{sawmill-client -c gtk-reload-style} in the shell to reload the
style manually

@item Functions for drawing color gradients and bevels into images. The
new @code{gradient} theme uses these and on-the-fly rendering to do
@code{afterstep}-like window titles

@item Configurator changes: use a paned widget to separate the list of
groups from the settings (stops their relative sizes changing), allow
each group to be customized separately, either through a new set of
root-submenus or the commands @code{customize:@var{group}} for each
@var{group}.

@item Changed the way that ``themes'' are organised, each theme now
gets its own directory, which must include a @file{theme.jl} or
@file{theme.jlc} script to initialise a frame-style of the same name as
the directory. While this script is being evaluated the image path is
set so that the theme can load any images stored in its directory.

Also created the variable @code{theme-load-path} containing the list of
directories searched when trying to load a theme. By default it
contains two directories: @file{~/.sawmill/themes/} and
@file{@var{prefix}/share/sawmill/@var{version}/themes}.

@item Resizing now chooses the direction to resize the window in by the
initial position of the pointer in relation to the window. The window
is divided into a 3x3 grid, the pointer must be in one of the outer
rectangles to resize in that direction

@item New commands @code{select-workspace:@var{X}} for @var{X} between
1 and 9

@item Support multiple depths, or layers, of windows

@item It's now possible to move the current workspace up or down the
list of all workspaces

@item New option @samp{-c COMMAND} to @code{sawmill-client}; invokes
the named interactive function

@item When an app asks for no title and no border, give it what it
wants---use the new @code{unframed} window type

@item The maximize button works

@item Option to control placement of transient windows
(@code{place-transient-mode})

@item Changing the frame style preserves the original window stacking
order

@item Added documentation strings for most built-in functions

@item Fix bug of evaluating both KeyPress @emph{and} KeyRelease events

@item Fix bug of making the shape mask of unshaped client windows too
big

@item Fix bug where already-handled BadWindow errors were being reported

@item Fix bug where the @code{window-ops-menu} could be displayed from
one window but then affect a different window

@item Fix bug where click-to-focus doesn't work for new windows

@item Fix bug where deleting the last workspace selected the first, not
the new last workspace

@item Fix bug where changing a colormap when no window is focused
causes a segfault

@item Fix bug where iconifying a window may leave it in the clicked
state after it's uniconified

@item Fix Caps_Lock and Num_Lock modifiers interfering with bindings

@item Fix accessing X properties on 64-bit architectures

@item Fix bug where pointer may be left grabbed after moving a window

@end itemize


@heading 0.3a

@itemize @bullet

@item Support the maximized GNOME window states

@item Where available, show documentation strings of commands in the
configurator

@item Improve the method of handling clicks in frame-parts

@item Fix asynchronous client-server protocol

@item Fix interactive window moving/resizing (don't leave traces of the
rubber-band, stop the window initially ``jumping'' to the pointer)

@end itemize


@heading 0.3

@itemize @bullet

@item Implemented window maximization

@item Added support for snapping to window edges when interactively
moving windows (@code{move-snap-edges} and @code{move-snap-epsilon})

@item First attempt at handling a subset of the Motif and OpenLook
window hints

@item Removed the @code{sloppy-focus} variable, it's replaced by
@code{focus-mode}. This can currently be one of @code{enter-exit}
(normal focus follows pointer), @code{enter-only} (``sloppy'' focus) or
@code{click} (click to focus)

@item When resolving pointer events, scan the @code{keymap} property of
the window under the pointer, not the focused window (as with keypress
events)

@item The @file{sawmill-client} program can now communicate inter-host,
since it uses X properties not raw sockets

@item New hook @code{before-exit-hook}, called immediately before
shutting down

@item Rewrote the GNOME support as a Lisp module

@item Placing windows interactively now works

@item Fixed the bug on Solaris where deleting windows could cause a
segmentation fault

@end itemize


@heading 0.2

@itemize @bullet

@item Added a user-customization system, inspired by Emacs' customize
facility. Invoke this through the @samp{sawmill-ui} program, or from
the @samp{Customize...} entry in the main menu. All changes are stored
in the Lisp script @file{~/.sawmill-custom}

@item Selected windows may now be raised
(@code{raise-selected-windows})

@item It's possible to prevent the mouse pointer being warped to
selected windows (@code{warp-to-selected-windows})

@item The @code{brushed-metal} and @code{simple} themes now define all
four standard frame types

@item Frame themes are now stored in a separate directory
(@file{@var{prefix}/share/sawmill/@var{version}/lisp/themes}) so that
the list of all available themes can be made automatically

@item The frame colors of the @code{simple} frame style can now be
customized (@code{simple-normal-color} and @code{simple-active-color})

@item The @file{sawmill-defaults.jl} script enables GNOME compliance
unconditionally (since it has no ill-effects even if GNOME isn't being
used)

@item Transient windows can be given the same frames as normal windows
(@code{decorate-transients})

@item Newly-displayed transient windows can be automatically given the
focus if their parent window is focused (@code{transients-get-focus})

@item Any newly-displayed windows can be automatically given the input
focus (@code{focus-windows-when-mapped})

@item The @code{foreground}, @code{background} and @code{font}
attributes of each frame part may now refer to a function

@item Fixed the window-move bug whereby the first motion event was
discarded

@item Fixed the bug where windows may be placed partially off the root
window, even if they needn't be

@item Fixed the shaped frame parts bug (they didn't work)

@item Miscellaneous other bug-fixes

@end itemize


@heading 0.1

First proper release
