.TH "sawfish-config" "1"
.SH "NAME"
sawfish-config \(em The Sawfish Configurator.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
\fBsawfish-config\fR [\fB \-\-group=\fIGROUP-NAME \fR\fP]  [\fB \-\-flatten \fP]  [\fB \-\-single-level \fP]  [\fB \-\-socket-id=\fIWINDOW-ID \fR\fP]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
This program can be used to invoke the Sawfish configurator manually;
if GNOME is used, then the GNOME Control Center can also be used
to customize certain classes.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.IP "\fB\-\-group=\fIGROUP-NAME\fP 	" 10
Display only \fIGROUP-NAME\fR.
.IP "" 10
\fIGROUP-NAME\fR should be one of these names: Sawfish, Appearance,
Bindings, Focus, Minimizing/Maximizing, Miscellaneous, Move/Resize,
Sounds, Window Rules, Workspaces
.IP "\fB\-\-flatten\fP" 10
display sub-groups inline instead of using a tree widget
(good for control center). In normal `tree' item, don't put frame
the widgets
.IP "\fB\-\-single-level\fP" 10
Don't display the tree widget. This option allows the configurator to
be embedded in the gnome control center. This also disables the
ok/cancel/etc buttons and enables a hacky protocol on stdin/stdout.
.IP "\fB\-\-socket-id\fP=\fIsocket-ID\fP 	" 10
Specifies the socket ID it connects to.
.IP "\fB\-\-disable-nls\fP" 10
Disable internationalization of messages.
.IP "\fB\-\-help\fP" 10
Prints help.
.SH "AUTHOR"
.PP
This manual page was written by Christian Marillat marillat@debian.org for
the \fBDebian GNU/Linux\fP system (but may be used by others).
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Sat 02 Feb 2008, 23:15
