.TH "sawfish" "1"
.SH "NAME"
sawfish \(em Sawfish window manager.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
\fBsawfish\fR [\fB\-\-display \fI[=DPY]\fR \fP]  [\fB\-\-multihead \fP]  [\fB\-\-visual \fI[=VISUAL]\fR \fP]  [\fB\-\-depth \fI[=DEPTH]\fR \fP]  [\fB\-\-disable-nls \fP]  [\fBFILE \fP]  [\fB\-\-batch \fP]  [\fB\-\-interp \fP]  [\fB-f, \-\-call \fIFUNCTION\fR \fP]  [\fB-l, \-\-load \fIFILE\fR \fP]  [\fB\-\-version \fP]  [\fB\-\-no-rc \fP] [\fB\-\-5\-buttons \fP] [\fB-q, \-\-quit \fP]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
Sawfish is a lisp-extensible window manager for X11. Its aim is to
allow all areas of window management (decoration, manipulation) to be
customized as far as is possible, yet still remain as fast as existing
window managers.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.IP "\fB\-\-disable-nls\fP" 10
Disable internationalization of messages.
.IP "\fBFILE\fP 	" 10
Load the Lisp file \fIFILE\fR (from the
cwd if possible, implies \fI\-\-batch\fR).
.IP "\fB\-\-batch\fP 	" 10
Batch mode: process options and exit.
.IP "\fB\-\-interp\fP 	" 10
Interpreted mode: don't load compiled Lisp files.
.IP "\fB-f, \-\-call\fP \fBFUNCTION\fP" 10
Call Lisp function \fIFUNCTION\fR.
.IP "\fB-l, \-\-load\fP \fBFILE\fP" 10
Load the file of Lisp forms called \fIFUNCTION\fR.
.IP "\fB\-\-version\fP" 10
Print version details.
.IP "\fB\-\-no-rc\fP" 10
Don't load rc or site-init files.
.IP "\fB-q, \-\-quit\fP" 10
Terminate the interpreter process.
.IP "\fB-\-5-buttons\fP" 10
Support keyboard layout switching, but drop mouse buttons 6 - 8 support.
.SS Display Options
.IP "\fB\-\-display=\fIDPY\fR\fP" 10
Connect to X display \fIDPY\fR.
.IP "\fB\-\-multihead\fP" 10
Fork a copy of sawfish for each screen.
.IP "\fB\-\-visual=\fIVISUAL\fR\fP" 10
Preferred \fIVISUAL\fR type.
.IP "\fB\-\-depth=\fIDEPTH\fR\fP" 10
Preferred color \fIDEPTH\fR.
.SS Customization Files Options
.IP "\fB\-\-custom-file\fP \fBFILE\fP" 10
Overrides the default custom file \fI~/.sawfish/custom\fR.
.IP "\fB\-\-window-history-file\fP \fBFILE\fP" 10
Overrides the default window history file \fI~/.sawfish/window-history\fR.
.IP "\fB\-\-no-rc" 10
Do not load the rc file.
.SS Debugging Option
.IP "\fB\-\-sync" 10
Read src/display.c. Don't use it unless you're sure.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
Sawfish is documented fully by \fIJohn Harper\fP       available via the \fBInfo\fP system.
.SH "AUTHOR"
.PP
This manual page was written by Christian Marillat marillat@debian.org for
the \fBDebian GNU/Linux\fP system (but may be used by others).
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Sat 02 Feb 2008, 23:15
